                                         Category Theory in Isabelle/HOL as a Basis for
                                              Meta-logical Investigation – Preprint

                                         Jonas Bayer1⋆ , Alexey Gonus1,⋆ , Christoph Benzmüller2,1 , and Dana S. Scott3
                                                                  1
                                                                    Freie Universität Berlin, Germany
                                                             2
                                                              Otto-Friedrich-Universität Bamberg, Germany
                                                    3




arXiv:2306.09074v2 [cs.LO] 16 Jun 2023
                                                      University of California & Topos Institute, Berkeley, CA, USA



                                                 Abstract. This paper presents meta-logical investigations based on cat-
                                                 egory theory using the proof assistant Isabelle/HOL. We demonstrate the
                                                 potential of a free logic based shallow semantic embedding of category
                                                 theory by providing a formalization of the notion of elementary topoi.
                                                 Additionally, we formalize symmetrical monoidal closed categories ex-
                                                 pressing the denotational semantic model of intuitionistic multiplicative
                                                 linear logic. Next to these meta-logical-investigations, we contribute to
                                                 building an Isabelle category theory library, with a focus on ease of use in
                                                 the formalization beyond category theory itself. This work paves the way
                                                 for future formalizations based on category theory and demonstrates the
                                                 power of automated reasoning in investigating meta-logical questions.

                                                 Keywords: Formalization of mathematics · Category theory · Proof
                                                 assistants · Formal methods · Shallow embeddings.


                                         1     Introduction
                                         Category theory is a very abstract and general theory of mathematical struc-
                                         tures [15] that next to being used for organizing mathematical theories can also
                                         serve as an axiomatic basis of mathematics. It has a myriad of use cases in fields
                                         ranging from topology and algebra to the foundations of mathematics.
                                             A good understanding of categorical notions and methods can provide a
                                         mathematician with a generic framework to unify and describe concepts. The
                                         results obtained on a category theoretical level might later be applied to partic-
                                         ular mathematical objects collected under a specific categorical setting. By this
                                         approach, many findings and ideas in one theory of mathematical structures can
                                         possibly be translated to the other.

                                         Formalizing Category Theory. Given its special standing in mathematics it is
                                         only natural to ask for a formalization of category theory, hoping that the ben-
                                         efits of the categorical perspective will carry over to formal mathematics. Con-
                                         cretely, one would not only wish to be able to formally use certain theorems
                                         from category theory but also utilize its power in the organization of formal
                                         mathematical libraries.
                                         ⋆
                                             Corresponding authors, contributed equally
2      J. Bayer, A. Gonus, C. Benzmüller, and D. S. Scott

    Yet, the formalization of category theory poses significant challenges. Many
experts consider first-order logic and the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms of set theory
as a suitable foundation for mathematics. However, e.g., topologists often work
with the (large) category of topological spaces, which cannot be easily repre-
sented within this system of axioms, since large categories in standard formal-
izations within such a system are (obviously) not sets. It is thus not immediately
clear how category theory should best be done formally.
    Next to this, significant challenges in the formalization of category theory
stem from the double position that it carries in mathematics. Ideally, a formal-
ization of category theory would not only lend itself to use cases in algebra but
also enable meta-logical investigations that use categories as a foundation of
mathematics. We refer to [8,16,17] for a deeper discussion on category-theoretic
versus set-theoretic foundations of mathematics.

Meta-logical investigations. In this paper we intend to demonstrate the potential
of a (shallow semantical embeddings based) formalization of category theory for
the investigation of meta-logical questions. This will be done using the proof
assistant Isabelle/HOL which is naturally suited for such work due to its strong
support for automation.
    Concretely, we give a formalization of the notion of elementary topoi that
carry an important role in fundamental mathematics. We build up category
theoretical concepts in order to eventually provide an elegant definition of a
topos. Moreover, we formalize all necessary concepts allowing for future work
that could implement the internal language of a topos.
    As a second meta-logical result, we present a formalization of linear logic
(LL). Linear logic carries the idea of treating mathematical “truths” as informa-
tion resources and has found a large number of theoretical and practical appli-
cations, ranging from computer science to linguistics. Categories come with the
inherent property of representing denotational semantical models for different
logics. We develop symmetrical monoidal closed categories that express the de-
notational semantical model of intuitionistic multiplicative linear logic (IMLL).
    In addition, at an orthogonal, methodological level, we study the scalability
of an approach to universal meta-logical reasoning [7], that is based on shallow
semantical embeddings of (layers of) object logics in classical higher-order logic,
aka Church’s simple type theory.

Further contributions. Next to our main focus on meta-logical investigation, we
aim at contributing to the build up of a category theory library in Isabelle. At
the time of writing, we are not aware of cases where the existing formalizations
in the Isabelle Archive of Formal Proofs [26,13,30,21] have been used for the
purpose of verification in other fields of mathematics. Our work cannot (yet)
compete with the extent of concepts verified in the aforementioned AFP entries.
However, we pay a lot of attention to closely mimicking mathematical notation,
cleanly organizing our theories, and giving examples of how to use the concepts
we provide. Thereby, we hope to facilitate the use of category theoretical notions
in future formalizations in other fields, too. Moreover, the paper is embedded
    Category Theory in Isabelle/HOL as a Basis for Meta-logical Investigation     3

in a larger project context, namely the exploration of the Benzmüller and Scott
[6] approach to the axiomatic modeling (in the tradition also of the early work
of Saunders Mac Lane, although with more emphasis on Dana Scott, Freyd
an Scedrov works) of category theory based on free-logic using the LogiKEy
meta-logical/logico-pluralistic KR&R [4] methodology. It was important for us
to study the scalability, advantages and disadvantages of this distinguished ap-
proach. In the end, we obtain a high degree of automation and a high level of
abstraction.


2     Category Theory from a Free Logic perspective

Our work exploits a shallow semantic embedding of free logic in Isabelle/HOL
(or, more generally, in Church’s simple type theory [3] aka. classical higher-order
logic HOL), that is subsequently used for defining a notion of category theory,
which then provides the basis for further formalization studies on top of it.


2.1    Free Logic and its SSE into Isabelle/HOL

Free Logic (FL) is a logic that comes with less existential assumptions than
its classical counterpart. Terms in free logic might denote so-called non-existent
objects, i.e., terms that refer to objects outside the domain of discourse [24]. Ex-
istential and universal quantifiers are assumed to range over the existent terms,
i.e., those that denote objects within the domain of discourse. Such a logic is
particularly interesting because it helps to reason about partiality.
     Therefore, free higher-order logic (FHOL) is ideal for an axiomatization of
category theory since the composition of morphisms in a category is a partial
function. In order to distinguish existent and non-existent objects we use the dual
domain approach, i.e., we consider a domain D of all objects which has a subset E
of objects that are considered to be the existent objects. Alternatively, one could
consider two disjoint sets for the non-existent and existent objects. We will follow
the first approach as has been previously discussed by Cocchiarella [22] and
also in the early work of Scott [28]. The issue of properly defining free (higher-
order) logic within the simple theory of types has been addressed in the works of
Schütte [27] and Farmer [9] whose approach we follow with some modifications.
It should also be noted that free logic could be implemented with exactly one
undefined value (Benzmüller and Scott have also shown that before [5]). Here
we decided to go without this additional requirement (of having one undefined
value) and to focus more on the “existence” part of the category theory without
carrying about “non-existing” area.

Shallow semantical embedding. In order to reason formally and interactively
within free logics without building a new theorem prover from scratch, a trans-
lation of logics is necessary. In Isabelle/HOL one can implement alike using a
shallow semantical embedding (SSE), which is based on logic translation ap-
proaches as discussed by Gabbay, Nonnengart, Ohlbach and de Rijke [11,25] for
4        J. Bayer, A. Gonus, C. Benzmüller, and D. S. Scott

translating e.g. propositional modal logics to first-order logic. Exploiting the ex-
pressivity and compositionality of the simply typed λ-calculus in HOL, the SSE
approach encodes such logic translations directly in HOL itself, which makes
external translation mechanisms superfluous. This HOL-internal translation ap-
proach has been successfully extended for various quantified non-classicals logics
and applied, under the name universal meta-logical reasoning [7], amongst oth-
ers, to encode free first-order logic [5] in Isabelle/HOL. This approach was then
further extended to embed FHOL in HOL [18] which, in this paper, we will rely
on to implement our higher-level categorical constructions.
    In SSE, the semantics of the language of interest, e.g. (positive) FHOL4 is
mapped to the corresponding syntax constructs of the target language. It may be
viewed as a translation between the logics, where only semantical differences are
targeted, for example, these could be the existential features of free semantics.
The SSE approach showed itself as a readily available way for implementing the
translation of a variety of nonclassical logics. It also enables the use of automation
from the target system which is not as well supported with a deep semantical
embedding.
    A shallow semantic embedding is to be contrasted with a deep semantic
embedding, in which the syntax of the target language is represented using an
inductive data structure (e.g., following the BNF of the language) and the se-
mantics of a formula is evaluated by recursively traversing the data structure.
Shallow semantic embeddings, by contrast, define the syntactic elements of the
target logic while reusing as much of the infrastructure of the meta-logic as pos-
sible; cf. also [14]. In particular, the degree of proof automation that can be
achieved is much better in the case of shallow semantic embeddings, since e.g.
inductive proofs on the structure of the embedded logic are omitted.

Formalization in Isabelle/HOL. Concretely, we represent the domain of objects
D through a type α in Isabelle/HOL. The notion of existence is then given
through a predicate E : α → bool. Therefore, every function will be total when
viewed on the level of Isabelle terms. However, from the free logic perspective
non-partial maps can still be observed as such since they are modelled as func-
tions that map some objects to “non-existent” objects outside E.
    At the level of free logic, one can immediately define several notions of equal-
ity, which are used in the definition of categories and reappear in the course of
the development of the formalizations.

Definition 1 (Equalities with Existence). Given x, y ∈ D define three no-
tions of equality as follows:

1. We write x ≃ y if and only if x = y ∧ Ex ∧ Ey (Existing Identity).
2. We also write x ∼= y if and only if (Ex ∨ Ey) −→ x = y (Kleene Equality).
3. Finally, we write x ≥ y precisely when Ex −→ x = y (Directed equality).
4
    Positive FHOL refers to a semantics for FHOL where formulas built from non-
    existing objects are allowed to be true [18].
    Category Theory in Isabelle/HOL as a Basis for Meta-logical Investigation         5

2.2    Formalization of Axiomatic Category Theory
In Isabelle/HOL, concepts from category theory have been formalized as early
as 2005 [26]. The original formalization could be improved and extended signif-
icantly as indicated by subsequent research [13,30,21].
    In addition to these, Benzmüller and Scott presented an alternative approach
for formalizing category theory in Isabelle/HOL [6], which is based on an ax-
iom system in free logic originally proposed by Scott [29]. This work models on
one-sorted categories, i.e., it only refers to morphisms without mentioning ob-
jects. This approach was first expanded upon by Tiemens who defined inverse
categories in order to generalize so-called modeloids [31].

Categories. Our formalization of categories follows the approach by Benzmüller
and Scott [6] with slight modifications5 . Firstly, when declaring the categorical
notions of domain, codomain and composition, polymorphic types are employed
which allow the use of higher-level constructions later. Secondly, an additional
axiom is added that states the existence of a “non-existent object”. This means
that D is required to be a strict superset of E which is advantageous in the
definition of certain concepts as it enables referring to an explicit non-existent
element. On the implementation side, we represent categories through an Isabelle
locale.

Functors. Functors are the morphisms between categories. The next definition
is slightly adapted from Freyd and Scedrov’s textbook [10]:6

Definition 2 (Functor). A functor F between two categories C and D
is a function F : C −→ D which satisfies the following axioms:
(1) Ex −→ E(F (x)), (2) ¬Ex −→ ¬E(F (x)), (3) F(domC (x)) ∼  = domD (F(x)),
(4) F(codC (x)) ∼
                = codD (F(x)), (5) F(x ·C y) ≥ F(x) ·D F(y).

Natural Transformations. Morphisms between functors are called natural trans-
formations. There can be two different formulations, resp. formalizations, of this
notion, and both are used in our work. The first definition is taken from [23] (the
one which is directly based on the idea of one-sorted categories and is heavily
exploited in this formalization) and modified according to the equalities that
were introduced earlier:

Definition 3 (Natural Transformation). A natural transformation
η between the functors F: C −→ D and G: C −→ D is a function
5
  It should be noted that all categories considered in this paper are one-sorted cat-
  egories and, therefore, all free variables appearing in the definitions refer to “mor-
  phisms”, although, they might be seen as “objects” in a usual sense when they satisfy
  specific (identity) predicates.
6
  The first and second axioms result from the totality of functions in Isabelle/HOL
  and are used for the separation of existing and non-existing morphisms. This part
  of the paper, where we have to deal with the proper preservation of existence, has
  been one of the main difficulties in the subsequent formulation of the concepts.
6        J. Bayer, A. Gonus, C. Benzmüller, and D. S. Scott

η : C −→ D such that: (1) Ex −→ E(η(x)), (2) ¬Ex −→ ¬E(η(x)),
(3) domD (η(x))      ∼
                     =   domD (F(x)), (4) codD (η(x)) ∼
                                                      = codD (F(x)),
(5) Ex · y −→ η(x) ·D F(y) ≃ G(x) ·D η(y).

    The monoidal category characterization is partly based on the notion of in-
verse natural transformation, which is more naturally described with the follow-
ing second definition:

Definition 4 (Natural Transformation through Identities). A natural
transformation η : F ⇒ G between the functors F: C −→ D and G: C −→ D
assigns to every object A a morphism η(A) : F(A) −→ G(A), such that for any
morphism x : A −→ B in C G(x) ·D η(domC (x)) ∼ = η(codC (x)) ·D F(x).

     This second definition can be (and was) extended to the former via a specifi-
cation of how this function operates in the more general case for all morphisms,
i.e. for x : A −→ B we have η(x) = G(x) ·D η(domC (x)). Starting with these
definitions we proceed further to define natural isomorphisms and inverse natu-
ral transformations. The later concept might be an example of a module system
advantage as it is easily defined as a locale built on top of the natural isomor-
phism locale with the specification of the inverse mapping,. Invoking Isabelle’s
unfold locales method during proving then allows to split the conditions into
simpler parts.


3     Formalization of Elementary Topoi

In order to perform the intended meta-logical investigations it is necessary to
define additional structures on top of categories. In particular, we formalize no-
tions like categories with binary (co)products, exponential categories and carte-
sian closed categories. Our implementation makes heavy use of Isabelle’s locales
that allow to elegantly model the layered character of these definitions. To val-
idate the correctness of the implementation we also formalize certain examples
including the category of categories and the category of sets. The Isabelle code
of all concepts that will be presented in this section can be found in a gitlab
repository.7 Our formalization of elementary topoi generally follows the book
“Elementary categories, elementary topoi” by Colin McLarty [19].

Formalization of elementary notions. To build up the necessary constructions,
we first formalize various elementary structures that can be defined within a cat-
egory. This includes initial and final objects, (co)products, equalizers, a generic
implementation of limits, monomorphisms and epimorphisms, and pullbacks.
Not only do we define these notions, but we also formalize the elementary equiv-
alences and relations between them. Each of these categorical structures received
their own Isabelle theory in order to increase clarity, with definitions made in a
multi-layered style and custom notation introduced for ease of use.
7
    https://permalink.jonasbayer.de/bachelorthesis
  Category Theory in Isabelle/HOL as a Basis for Meta-logical Investigation       7

    As an example, consider the beginning of the theory on pullbacks shown
in Fig. 1. There, we first introduce the preliminary notions of is corner and
is pullback before defining pullback diagrams. The latter is given in custom
syntax that allows a presentation in diagram format. Although such syntax can
become cluttered during proving and therefore is not the most useful represen-
tation in that context, it still allows for a very readable presentation of results
within the theorem prover. This approach is continued throughout the formaliza-
tion, further examples include product diagrams or even commutative diagrams
with multiple squares.




                Fig. 1. The implementation of pullbacks in Isabelle



    Next to these constructions, we also give an implementation of several ba-
sic categories. Most notably, this includes the category of sets, the category of
categories and the poset category. All these examples are formalized following
the same scheme of first defining a custom type which will correspond to the
type α in the category definition. Consequently, the existence predicate E fol-
lowed by definitions for (co)domain and composition can be declared. In all three
cases, the instance proof can essentially be handled by Isabelle’s automatic tools.
When using Isabelle2021 (February 2021), which is the version this development
started with, occasional help is only necessary for proving associativity of com-
position. In Isabelle2022 even this part can be tackled by automated tools within
less than 5 seconds when employed on an average personal computer.


Categories with additional structure. Refering back to the elementary structures
defined previously, we implement categories that have additional structures. We
start with categories that have binary products and/or binary coproducts. To
validate these definitions, it is also formalized that the poset category has binary
8      J. Bayer, A. Gonus, C. Benzmüller, and D. S. Scott

products and coproducts when the poset is a lattice. In this case, products
correspond to meets and coproducts correspond to joins.
    Having defined binary products one can continue to declare exponential ob-
jects and exponential evaluation maps in a category which we collect into an
Isabelle record. Exponentials are then used to specify cartesian closed categories
after having defined cartesian categories. For the precise mathematical defini-
tions, we refer the reader to McLarty [19] whose presentation we follow closely.

Formalization of topoi. With all these preliminary notions at hand, the definition
of a topos can finally be formalized:




           Fig. 2. The implementation of an elementary topos in Isabelle


    A topos is a special case of a cartesian closed category that also has a so-
called subobject classifier and a designated object t representing the boolean
value true. Here we make use of the aforementioned custom syntax to present
the pullback diagram in a very intuitive form. Moreover, we formalize that in
a topos all monomorphisms are equalizers, which does not hold in arbitrary
categories.
    To conclude, the formalization we give provides a basis for for further meta-
logical investigations related to category theory. In particular, an interesting
continuation of this work would be the implementation of the internal language
of an elementary topos including topos axioms.


4   Formalization of the Categorical model of IMLL
Another direction that has been explored in the proposed approach to cate-
gorical formalizations is the one laying down a translation layer between the
HOL/FHOL and intuitionistic multiplicative linear logic (IMLL) semantics. The
motivation behind the IMLL formalization (or its semantics, to be more precise)
was to investigate practical capabilities of Isabelle/HOL in the field of meta-
logical questions, i.e., to derive tools that would formulate IMLL theorems and
proofs through its encoded semantical language that talk about morphisms. It is
important to emphasize the word “practical” in this context, since it is of course
    Category Theory in Isabelle/HOL as a Basis for Meta-logical Investigation           9

generally possible to model a wide range of constructions with the help of a proof
assistant such as Isabelle/HOL. However, it is not a priori clear if this can be
done with a reasonable effort with respect to the logic “translations” as exploited
in our SSE approach. In this paper we have chosen (a fragment of) linear logic
as our object of study, since it has a plethora of applications in various domains.
The Isabelle implementation and certification of all constructions presented in
this section (which make use of the “locales” feature of Isabelle/HOL) can be
found in a GitHub repository.8

4.1    IMLL and its Categorical Model
Linear Logic (LL) was proposed by Girard in 1987 [12] as a refinement of classical
as well as intuitionistic logic. Within LL the two different notions of conjunction
and disjunction are introduced together, i.e., multiplicative and additive types of
connectives. They behave distinctly in derivations (through inference rules), but
their intrinsic difference can be revealed with a computational interpretation of
proofs [2]. Within this work we deal with a particular fragment of LL, which
is intuitionistic multiplicative linear logic (IMLL), by restricting the syntax and
adapting inference rules.
     The categorical denotational model of IMLL is built around the notion of a
monoidal category.9 The key part of a semantical translation is a function [[·]]
that assigns some categorical construct to a proof-theoretical piece. Moreover,
the construction of categories using only one sort of objects, i.e., morphisms,
determines our main interest in modeling proofs (rather than formulas) with
categorical denotational semantics. In order to briefly present the general idea,
one assigns a morphism f : [[A]] −→ [[B]] to a proof of a sequent A ⊢ B.10 Here,
[[A]] means an identity morphism. The final goal within this part of the work is to
translate all the inference rules we have in IMLL to theorems about morphisms
in a special category, i.e., symmetrical monoidal closed category (SMCC), and to
show practical feasibility of these meta-logical translations.

4.2    Isabelle/HOL formalization of the IMLL Categorical Model
To fully represent IMLL connectives, such as linear intuitionistic implication and
multiplicative conjunction, we need to incorporate their corresponding inference
rules into our categorical setting. These rules describe the connectives’ behavior
as well as their structural and non-logical inference rules. To do so, we must make
use of monoidal categories, braidings and symmetries, and closed structures.
    The shift towards monoidal categories for modeling IMLL semantics is cru-
cial due to the necessity to move away from diagonal maps in categories which
8
   https://github.com/HaskDev0/Linear-Logic-Cat-semantics
9
   For more information, see Mellies [20]. It provides a thorough description of the topic
   as well as lists all the inference rules for IMLL that are formalized and proved within
   our framework.
10
   All the translations of proofs are carried out under proof-theoretic normalization
   invariance.
10      J. Bayer, A. Gonus, C. Benzmüller, and D. S. Scott

allow the duplication of the objects, or, equivalently, resources [1].11 Moreover,
the locales environments of Isabelle/HOL are used to develop formalizations of
translated IMLL concepts for their convenience of presentation and of working
with algebraic theories.

Definition 5 (Monoidal Category). A monoidal category C is a category
C equipped with: (1) a bifunctor ⊗ : C × C −→ C, (2) a natural isomor-
phism12 αA,B,C : (A ⊗ B) ⊗ C −→ A ⊗ (B ⊗ C), (3) a special identity
morphism, or object in our meaning, e, which is a unit, and (4) two natu-
ral isomorphisms e ⊗ A −→ A and ρA : A ⊗ e −→ A, which satisfy the
triangular identity (C.Id A) ∧ (C.Id B) −→ (A ⊗ λB ) · αA,e,B ≃ ρA ⊗ B
and the pentagonal identity (C.Id A) ∧ (C.Id B) ∧ (C.Id C) ∧ (C.Id D) −→
(A ⊗ αB,C,D ) · (αA,B⊗C,D · αA,B,C ⊗ D) ≃ αA,B,C⊗D · αA⊗B,C,D .13

   Here it is essential to understand that the natural isomorphism α acts be-
tween functors (• ⊗ •) ⊗ • : C × C × C −→ C and • ⊗ (• ⊗ •) : C × C × C −→ C of
domain C × C × C and codomains C. There exist similar interpretations for the
other two isomorphisms occurring in the definition.

Definition 6 (Braided Monoidal Category). A braided monoidal cate-
gory is a monoidal category C equipped with a braiding, i.e. a natural iso-
morphism γA,B : A ⊗ B −→ B ⊗ A, making two hexagonal axioms hold:
(1) (C.Id A) ∧ (C.Id B) ∧ (C.Id C) −→ αB,C,A · (γA,B⊗C · αA,B,C ) ≃
(B ⊗ γA,C ) · (αB,A,C · (γA,B ⊗ C)), and (2) (C.Id A) ∧ (C.Id B) ∧ (C.Id C)
     −1                  −1                      −1
−→ αC,A,B  · (γA⊗B,C · αA,B,C ) ≃ (γA,C ⊗ B) · (αA,C,B · (A ⊗ γB,C )).

Definition 7 (Symmetric Monoidal Category). A symmetric monoidal cat-
egory is a braided monoidal category C, whose braiding is a symmetry, i.e.
                                −1
(C.Id A) ∧ (C.Id B) −→ γA,B ≃ γB,A .

    These notions already allow one to reason about the multiplicative conjunc-
tion and exchange inference rules in IMLL, and the final step is to properly
describe closed structures. There are three equivalent definitions of these terms,
and the way to define one chooses depends on the goals and the frame one works
in due to the ease of use in some cases. We will give two variations here and
we will provide some comments on their connection. The first one was chosen
since it will directly be used in further developments of IMLL semantics, and
the second one will deliver a clearer view of the notion and the understanding of
why we introduced an evaluation morphism eval later (see Def. 10) to describe
the translation of formulas to categorical constructs.

Definition 8 (Left Closed Monoidal Category). A left monoidal closed
category is a monoidal category C endowed with a left closed structure, i.e. with
11
   The definitions that are needed to describe the model of IMLL are taken from Mellies
   [20] and adopted to our framework.
12
   A family of natural isomorphisms.
13
   C.Id denotes an identity morphism predicate.
     Category Theory in Isabelle/HOL as a Basis for Meta-logical Investigation        11

a data of: (1) a bifunctor ⊸: C op × C −→ C, and (2) a bijection C(A ⊗ B, C) ∼
                                                                             =b
C(B, A ⊸ C), which is natural in A, B and C.14

    The second point in the definition should be understood as the natural trans-
formation between the functors C( ⊗ex , ) and C( , ⊸ ) which act between
categories C op ×C op ×C and Set. Therefore, the encoding of Hom-functors should
have been encoded first, which would have added additional layer of complex-
ity. Instead, we decided to translate it to the language of sets directly with the
help of two function Φ and Ψ acting as inverses of each other and having more
inputs than just one, namely, the morphism itself. The functions, thus, have the
following types:

                  Φ ::′ a ⇒′ a ⇒′ a ⇒′ a and Ψ ::′ a ⇒′ a ⇒′ a ⇒′ a.

    The reason we are using two functions describing the bijection lies in the
fact that in the Isabelle/HOL system functions are total, but in our framework
we are working with the so-called existent morphisms which constitute only a
subdomain of some type. Moreover, two additional arguments need to be speci-
fied when we want to apply the mentioned bijection, in order to know the exact
structure of the domain of the input morphism for the bijection going right in
the Def. 8 (2) and the same for the codomain of the input morphism for the
bijection going left. In other words, given some morphism f , and a necessity to
check whether the domain of f is exactly A⊗B, we cannot merely apply the dom
function to find the hidden parts. Therefore, this additional information recovers
the missing data. The same reasoning clarifies the equivalent features of Ψ . This
encoding process also reveals the actual compressed information that is needed
to talk about IMLL semantical constructs within Isabelle/HOL. Therefore, for-
malization of this definition in Isabelle/HOL looks as follows:

Definition 9 (Left Closed Monoidal Category in Isabelle/HOL). A left
monoidal closed category is a monoidal category C endowed with a bifunctor
⊸: C op × C −→ C and functions Φ and Ψ , that satisfy:
(1) (f : A⊗B → C)∧(C.IdEx A)∧(C.IdEx B) −→ Φ(A, B, f ) : B → (A ⊸ C),
(2) (g : B → A ⊸ C) ∧ (C.IdEx A) ∧ (C.IdEx B) −→ Ψ (A, C, g) : A ⊗ B → C,
(3) (f : A ⊗ B → C) ∧ (C.IdEx A) ∧ (C.IdEx B) −→ Ψ (A, C, Φ(A, B, f )) ≃ f ,
(4) (g : B → A ⊸ C) ∧ (C.IdEx A) ∧ (C.IdEx B) −→ Φ(A, B, Ψ (A, C, g)) ≃ g,
    and the requirement for Ψ for being natural in f :
(5) (f : A ⊗ B → C) ∧ (C.IdEx A) ∧ (C.IdEx B) ∧ (cod x = A) ∧ (cod y = B) ∧
    (dom z = C) −→ Φ(dom x, dom y, z ·(f ·(x⊗y))) ≃ (z ⊸ y)·(Φ(A, B, f )·y).

We have proved (in our formalization) that this function Ψ is a natural trans-
formation. As was pointed out above, the other definition of left closed structure
is the following:
14
     The sign ∼=b here means the bijection between the sets and we introduced it in order
     to distinguish it from the Kleene duality.
12      J. Bayer, A. Gonus, C. Benzmüller, and D. S. Scott

Definition 10 (Left Closed Structure). A left closed structure in a monoidal
category C is composed of: (1) an identity morphism A ⊸ B, and (2) a left
evaluation morphism evalA,B : A ⊗ (A ⊸ B) −→ B, for every identity mor-
phisms A and B. The evalA,B morphism satisfies the following universal prop-
erty: ∀f : A ⊗ X −→ B.(∃!h : X −→ A ⊸ B) ∧ (f ≃ evalA,B · (A ⊗ h)).15

    The evaluation morphism eval is a translation of the elimination rule for ⊸
if the proof system is designed with it instead of the left rule for ⊸. The former
definition entails the latter for a left closed structure (this is formalized as a
theorem in Isabelle/HOL). In the same way, with slight modifications, one may
define the right closed structure.
    At this point we are able to describe the categorical model of IMLL.

Definition 11 (Symmetric Monoidal Closed Category). A symmetric
monoidal closed category (SMCC) is a monoidal category C equipped with a sym-
metry γ and a left closed structure ⊸.

    We proved in our formalization that in any such monoidal category there is
also a right closed structure as well, which confirms theoretical expectations. To
demonstrate this, define the functions • ⊸r • = • ⊸ •, Φr (f ) = Φ(f · γA,B ) and
Ψr (g) = Ψ (g) · γB,A for morphisms f : B ⊗ A −→ C and g : B −→ A ⊸ C, which
would exhibit the desired properties.16 Provided that we described through lo-
cales tensor product T, left closed structure Impl, natural isomorphisms α, µ, ρ,
natural isomorphisms between Hom-functors via Φ, Ψ and a symmetry γ, the
corresponding encoding of a SMCC inside Isabelle/HOL would look like:
    At this point we are ready to give the formalization of IMLL formulas in
SMCC. For that, we start with the discussion of the well-known principle in
intuitionistic logic, which in particular holds in IMLL, that every formula A
implies its double negation ¬¬A. For this purpose there should be some formula
⊥, which helps to define the negation of a formula as A ⊸ ⊥ [20]. Thus, the
mentioned principle translates to the fact in SMCC as:

Proposition 1 (Existence of Double Negation Morphism). There is al-
ways a morphism δA : A −→ (A ⊸ ⊥) ⊸ ⊥ for every identity A in any SMCC.

   Note that this is not a new result, but a proposition that we used to test our
encoding with and which we certified within the Isabelle/HOL SSE framework.
   It is worth mentioning that in a sequent style proof there is no difference how
we derive the formula (A2 ⊸ ⊥) ⊸ ⊥ given a formula A1 and a derivation π
of A1 ⊢ A2 . In other words, we could have derived to it via double negating A1
and then applying the derivation π translated for double negation, or we double
negate A2 . In SMCC this fact corresponds to:
15
   Here, we exploited a new abbreviation ∃!h.P (h) for unique existence, which means
   ∃h.(P (h) ∧ (∀t.P (t) → t = h)).
16
   That is exactly the place where we use in the encoding those additional first two
   parameters of Φ and Ψ to specify the morphisms.
    Category Theory in Isabelle/HOL as a Basis for Meta-logical Investigation   13




         Fig. 3. The implementation of a symmetric monoidal closed category


Proposition 2 (Double Negation as a Natural Isomorphism). In every
SMCC the constructed morphism δA is, in fact, a natural transformation.

    Propositions 1, 2 already quite firmly indicate the possibility of applying the
chosen categorical axiomatization and formalization approach to logical ques-
tions expressed in a denotational (categorical) framework. As long as everything
above is formalized in Isabelle/HOL, it is now possible to translate all the in-
ference rules of IMLL as theorems about the morphisms in SMCC. For this
step one has to be slightly creative in terms of finding the most appropriate
translations, i.e., relying only on automated tools for this step would be a very
naive way, leading to an explosion of “search space”, while human interference
with ”reasonable” assumptions and ideas solves the problem of finding suitable
morphisms that represent specific IMLL sequents. The task was successfully ac-
complished, as can be seen in the full encoding. This provides some evidence for
the practical feasibility of using readily available higher-order theorem provers
to support even very abstract and complex meta-logical investigations for IMLL
within a categorical language suitably encoded in free logic embedded in HOL.


5     Conclusions
This article has outlined an option for, and the potential of, formalizing cat-
egory theory in higher-order logic to investigate meta-logical questions. The
14      J. Bayer, A. Gonus, C. Benzmüller, and D. S. Scott

Isabelle/HOL proof assistant was used to formalize the notion of elementary
topoi and to subsequently develop and formalize symmetrical monoidal closed
categories expressing the denotational semantical model of intuitionistic mul-
tiplicative linear logic. This was carried out on the basis of (layered) shallow
semantical embeddings, exploiting at the base layer a shallow semantical em-
bedding of positive free higher-order logic in classical higher-order logic.
    In addition to these meta-logical investigations, we outline with our work a
possible way of building-up a category theory library in Isabelle to support reuse
and application. We optimized our formalization to closely resemble mathemat-
ical notation and provided examples of how to use our formalized concepts. We
hope that this will facilitate the future use of category theoretical notions in
formalizations beyond just category theory itself.


References
 1. Abramsky, S., Tzevelekos, N.: Introduction to categories and categorical logic. In:
    Coecke, B. (ed.) New Structures for Physics, pp. 3–94. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
    Berlin, Heidelberg (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-12821-9 1
 2. Beffara, E.: Introduction to linear logic (Aug 2013), https://hal.archives-ouvertes.
    fr/cel-01144229, lecture
 3. Benzmüller, C., Andrews, P.: Church’s type theory. In: Zalta, E.N. (ed.) The Stan-
    ford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, pp. 1–62 (in pdf version). Metaphysics Research
    Lab, Stanford University, summer 2019 edn. (2019), https://plato.stanford.edu/
    entries/type-theory-church/
 4. Benzmüller, C., Parent, X., van der Torre, L.: Designing normative theories for eth-
    ical and legal reasoning: LogiKEy framework, methodology, and tool support. Arti-
    ficial Intelligence 287, 103348 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2020.103348
 5. Benzmüller, C., Scott, D.: Automating Free Logic in Isabelle/HOL. In:
    Greuel, G.M., Koch, T., Paule, P., Sommese, A. (eds.) Mathematical Soft-
    ware – ICMS 2016. pp. 43–50. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2016).
    https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-42432-3 6
 6. Benzmüller, C., Scott, D.S.: Automating Free Logic in HOL, with an Experimental
    Application in Category Theory. Journal of Automated Reasoning 64(1), 53–72
    (Jan 2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10817-018-09507-7
 7. Benzmüller,      C.:    Universal    (meta-)logical    reasoning:    Recent     suc-
    cesses.     Science    of   Computer       Programming      172,    48–62     (2019).
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scico.2018.10.008
 8. Ernst, M.: Category theory and foundations. In: Categories for the
    Working Philosopher, pp. 69–89. Oxford University Press (2017).
    https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198748991.003.0005
 9. Farmer, W.M.: A Partial Functions Version of Church’s Simple Theory of Types.
    The Journal of Symbolic Logic 55(3), 1269–1291 (1990), http://www.jstor.org/
    stable/2274487
10. Freyd, P., Scedrov, A.: Categories, Allegories, North-Holland Mathematical
    Library, vol. 39. Elsevier Science (1990), https://books.google.de/books?id=
    fCSJRegkKdoC
11. Gabbay, D.M.: Introduction to labelled deductive systems. In: Gabbay, D.M.,
    Guenthner, F. (eds.) Handbook of Philosophical Logic: Volume 17, pp. 179–266.
  Category Theory in Isabelle/HOL as a Basis for Meta-logical Investigation             15

    Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-6600-
    63
12. Girard, J.Y.: Linear logic. Theoretical Computer Science 50(1), 1–101 (1987).
    https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3975(87)90045-4
13. Katovsky, A.: Category theory. Arch. Formal Proofs 2010 (2010)
14. Kirchner, D., Benzmüller, C., Zalta, E.N.: Computer science and meta-
    physics: A cross-fertilization. Open Philosophy 2(1), 230–251 (2019).
    https://doi.org/10.1515/opphil-2019-0015
15. MacLane, S.: Categories for the Working Mathematician. Springer-Verlag, New
    York (1971), graduate Texts in Mathematics, Vol. 5
16. Maddy, P.: Set-theoretic foundations. Contemporary Mathematics 690, 289–322
    (2017)
17. Maddy, P.: What Do We Want a Foundation to Do? Comparing Set-Theoretic,
    Category-Theoretic, and Univalent Approaches. In: Centrone, S., Kant, D.,
    Sarikaya, D. (eds.) Reflections on the Foundations of Mathematics: Univalent Foun-
    dations, Set Theory and General Thoughts, pp. 293–311. Springer International
    Publishing, Cham (2019), https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-15655-8 13
18. Makarenko, I., Benzmüller, C.: Positive Free Higher-Order Logic and Its Automa-
    tion via a Semantical Embedding. In: Schmid, U., Klügl, F., Wolter, D. (eds.)
    KI 2020: Advances in Artificial Intelligence. pp. 116–131. Springer International
    Publishing, Cham (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58285-2 9
19. McLarty, C.: Elementary categories, elementary toposes. Clarendon Press (1992)
20. Melliès, P.A.: Categorical semantics of linear logic, pp. 1 – 196. No. 27 in Panoramas
    et Synthèses, Société Mathématique de France (2009)
21. Milehins, M.: Category theory for zfc in hol i: Foundations: Design patterns,
    set theory, digraphs, semicategories. Archive of Formal Proofs (September 2021),
    https://isa-afp.org/entries/CZH Foundations.html, Formal proof development
22. Morscher, E., Simons, P.: Free Logic: A Fifty-Year Past and an Open Fu-
    ture. In: Morscher, E., Hieke, A. (eds.) New Essays in Free Logic: In Hon-
    our of Karel Lambert, pp. 1–34. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht (01 2001).
    https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-015-9761-6 1
23. nLab authors: single-sorted definition of a category. https://ncatlab.org/nlab/
    show/single-sorted+definition+of+a+category (Apr 2021)
24. Nolt, J.: Free Logic. In: Zalta, E.N. (ed.) The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
    Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, Winter 2020 edn. (2020)
25. Ohlbach, H.J., Nonnengart, A., de Rijke, M., Gabbay, D.M.: Encoding two-valued
    nonclassical logics in classical logic. In: Robinson, J.A., Voronkov, A. (eds.) Hand-
    book of Automated Reasoning (in 2 volumes), pp. 1403–1486. Elsevier and MIT
    Press (2001). https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-044450813-3/50023-0
26. O’Keefe, G.: Category theory to yoneda’s lemma. Archive of Formal Proofs (April
    2005), https://isa-afp.org/entries/Category.html, Formal proof development
27. Schütte, K.: Syntactical and Semantical Properties of Simple Type Theory. The
    Journal of Symbolic Logic 25(4), 305–326 (1960), http://www.jstor.org/stable/
    2963525
28. Scott, D.: Existence and description in formal logic. In: Schoenman, R., Russell,
    B. (eds.) Philosopher of the Century, pp. 181–200. George Allen & Unwin, London
    (1967), reprinted with additions. In: Lambert, K. (ed.) Philosophical Application
    of Free Logic, pp. 28–48. Oxford University Press, 1991
29. Scott, D.: Identity and existence in intuitionistic logic. In: Fourman, M., Mul-
    vey, C., Scott, D. (eds.) Applications of Sheaves: Proceedings of the Re-
    search Symposium on Applications of Sheaf Theory to Logic, Algebra, and
16      J. Bayer, A. Gonus, C. Benzmüller, and D. S. Scott

    Analysis. pp. 660–696. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (1979).
    https://doi.org/10.1007/BFb0061839
30. Stark, E.W.: Category theory with adjunctions and limits. Archive of Formal
    Proofs (June 2016), https://isa-afp.org/entries/Category3.html, Formal proof de-
    velopment
31. Tiemens, L., Scott, D.S., Benzmüller, C., Benda, M.: Computer-supported ex-
    ploration of a categorical axiomatization of modeloids. In: Relational and Alge-
    braic Methods in Computer Science – 18th International Conference, RAMiCS
    2020, Palaiseau, France, April 8–11, 2020, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Com-
    puter Science, vol. 12062, pp. 302–317. Springer (2020), https://doi.org/10.1007/
    978-3-030-43520-2 19
