                 On   constructing models for arithmetic

                            DANA     SCOTT     (Chicago)


         § 0. Introduction. In geometry models have been used
    with great success for proofs of independence. In arithmetic
    the situation is considerably different: even though one can
    construct many kinds of models for this theory using general
    metamathematical      methods,     it    has    not    yet   been     possible    to
    apply these models in new independence proofs. No doubt one
    important fact is that arithmetic has a recursively unsolvable
    decision problem. Simple questions about existence of solutions
~   of polynomial equations probably lead to unsolvable problems,
    though this fact has not yet been proved. Thus the first
    attempt to examine a proposed model will lead at once to
    difficult situations with the most straightforward combinations
    of elements under addition and multiplication. Of course, one
    would hope for an indirect proof that the model satisfies the
    axioms of arithmetic which would avoid such direct veriti-
    cations, but this indirect method has not yet been found.
    Another point to remember in comparing geometry and arith-
    metic is that the axioms for first-order geometry can be given
    with sentences of universal-existential type (cf. Tarski [23]),
    while the axioms of first-order arithmetic must always involve
    arbitrarily many changes of quantifiers in their formulation.
    The effect of this state of affairs on building models is clear.
    One conclusion is that it may be more reasonable to try to
    construct    models   for   interesting        fragments     or     subtheories   of
    arithmetic rather than for the whole of first-order arithmetic.
    Another     conclusion is that one might          well turn one’s        attention
    to questions of definability rather than independence, for such
    problems may find a more workable translation into model-
    theoretical terms. In any case only a scant beginning has been
    made in any of these directions.
         In this paper in Section 1 some simple algebraic facts
    about ordered rings are given together with a result about
 236                           D.   Seott


finite   generation   of   models    for    arithmetic.   In   Section   2
 a method is given for constructing models for all true sentences
 of arithmetic as homomorphie images of function rings which
can be stated in purely ring-theoretical terms. The method is
related to the well-known Skolem construction and is a special
case of a general procedure that has been used by several
authors. Certain natural modifications of the idea do not lead
to models for all provable sentences as will be indicated.
In Section 3 constructions within polynomial rings are shown
not to give models, but some unsolved questions in this
direction are stated. Finally in Section 4 topics of recursiveness
and definability are discussed, and the ideas are related to
Gédel’s Incompleteness Theorem yielding another proof of
this result.
     The author should like to record his indebtedness to
Simon     Kochen, Georg Kreisel and Stanley          Tennenbaum,
with whom he has had many long hours of discussion. The
enthusiastic and original ideas of these people have had con-
siderable influence on the author’s point of view, no doubt
to a greater extent than has been properly indicated here in
this expository account.
       § 1. Ordered rings. All rings considered will be com-
 mutative rings with unit. The notion of a (totally or linearly)
ordered ring is assumed as known. To be somewhat more spe-
 cific a ring is an algebraic structure of the form <R, +, -, 0,1),
 while an ordered ring is of the form <R, +, -, 0,1, <>. This
 distinction is only important when we wish to discuss the
 first-order theory corresponding to a given ring, for the ordering
 relation is not always definable in terms of the plain ring
 structure. An integral domain (or simply domain) is a ring
 without zero divisors. A ring is called formally real if the zero
 of the ring is not the finite sum of any number of non-zero
 Squares in the ring.
       In the sequel in stating results the word ‘Proposition’
 will be used to apply to those facts that are either well-known
 or particularly easy to prove. They have been included only
 for emphasis and completeness.
     PROPOSITION 1.1. An ordered ring is always a formally
real integral domain.                      )
     Conversely, every formally real domain can be ordered,
though not always in a unique way. In this connection see
                  On constructing models for arithmetic                      237

                                                       is densely
xan der Waerden [25], p. 242-244. An ordered domain
                                 in the sense that betwee n any
ordered if the ordering is dense
                                                    is discretely
two elements there is a third. An offered domain
                                                  that  there is
ordered if there are no “fractions’’ in the sense
no element between 0 and 1.
     PROPOSITION 1.2. An        ordered domain         is either densely
ordered or discretely ordered .
                                                                         d
      Proof. Suppose that the domain is not discretely ordere
            0<2r<1. Suppose a<b,           then   a<     ra+(1  —2)b  <b.
and let
Hence, the domain is densely ordered.
                                                                      non-
      An ordered domain is well-ordered if every bounded
                                                                          is
empty subset has a least element. An ordered domain
                                   er  for   elemen ts    a, } in the ring,
archimedean ordered if whenev
 0<a<b, then there is an integer ” such that ) < na.
      PROPOSITION 1.3. (i) Every well-ordered domain is isomor-
phic to the rings of integers;
                                                                         is
      (ii) Every diseretely and archimedean ordered domain
isomorphic to the ring of integers.
      The ring of integers will be denoted by Z. Clearly if we
                                                                         of
are to study other similar kinds of domains, the notion
                                            ement   can   be  weaken   ed
well-ordering is too strong. The requir
                                                                       the
by applying the minimum condition not to all subsets of
                                                                 defined .
ordered domain but only to those that are algebraically
                                                                         )
An algebraically defined subset of a domain (ordered domain
                               elemen ts of   the  domain      satisfy ing
 consists exactly of those
                                                                       one
 relative to the domain a certain first-order formula with
 free variable involving symbols for —, -, 9,          1 (<).   An   alge-
 braically well-ordered domain is an ordered domain in which
                                                                       has
 every non-empty bounded algebraically defined subset
                                  domain  is  inducti ve if  every   alge-
 a least element. An ordered
                                                                        the
 braically defined subset containing 0 and closed under
 function r—+1 always includes all non-negative element          s.

      PROPOSITION 1.4. An ordered domain                is   inductive     tf and
 only if it is algebrazcally well-ordered.
       Proposition     1.5.   An   inductive   domain    is always       discretely
 ordered.
       It will be noticed that the usual terminology has been
                                                              for
  changed somewhat in this discussion. Instead of models
  arithmetic we use the term inductive domain,   and  instead   of
  non-standard model for arithmetic we refer to non-arc himedea n
 238                  ;            D.   Scott


inductive domains. This rather more colorful algebraic termi-
nology, it is felt, conveys a better indication of the nature of
the objects studied fron’’a mathematical point of view.
     In the integers and in many other rings, the ordering is
uniquely determined by the ring structure. In particular, an
ordered ring is quadratically ordered if every non-negative
element is a (finite) sum of squares. The usual proofs in books
on number theory can be used to establish the following.
     PROPOSITION 1.6. In an inductive domain every non-negative
element 1s a sum of four squares.
     It turns out that the proper homomorphic images of
inductive rings are never inductive (cf. Mendelson [12]). Indeed
we can prove even more.
      PROPOSITION 1.7. If a quadratically ordered domain is dis-
cretely ordered, then no proper homomorphic image of the domain
is formally real.
      Proof. Let D be a domain satisfying the hypothesis and
let h be a (ring) homomorphism onto another domain which
is not an isomorphism. Hence, there must be a positive element
aeD such that h(a)=0. Now a>1, so that a—1 = » di,
                                                                     t<n
for    suitable   elements   0),..., Dn—1 6D.   Thus     —1=   >» (h(d;))”
                                                               t<n
in the image domain which clearly implies that it is not
formally real.
      Finally we shall discuss in this section questions of how
inductive domains can (or better cannot) be generated. The
notion of an algebraically (first-order) definable set was ex-
plained above, and algebraically definable functions may be
introduced in a similar way. A function (f(z) say) will be
called parametrically definable in a domain D, if there is an
element a in.D and an algebraically definable function g(x, y)
over D such that f(x) = g(x, a) for all « in D. A sequence
fox’), fi(2),...»   of functions   indexed by integers    will be    called
parametrically definable if there is an a in D and an algebraically
definable function g(x, y, 2) such that f,(x) = g(x, a, ») for all
elements x of D and integers n. Here we consider the integer
also as an element of D. The notion of a parametrically definable
sequence of elements can be explained in an analogous way.
     A straight-forward use of algebraic well-ordering or the
induction axiom will show that parameters (which were not
used at first) can be allowed. In particular one proves
                   On constructing models for arithmetic                 239


     Lema 1.8. If f(a) is a parametrically definable               function
in an inductive domain D and a> 0, then the set
                              {f(@):     0<a47<a}
has   a least upperbound in D.
     COROLLARY 1.9. In a non-archimedean inductive domavn,
no parametrically definable sequence of elements can contain all
elements of the domain.
     Proof. Let the sequence be given by f(x) where f(x) is
parametrically definable. Let a be chosen so that a> n for
all integers n. Then apply 1.8.
     THEOREM 1.10. No non-archimedean inductive domain can
be generated from a parametrically definable sequence of elements
by making use of a parametrically definable sequence of functions.
      Proof   (in outline).    Let the    sequence   of elements   be   given
by f(n) and the sequence of functions by g(t, m). In an in-
ductive domain consider the least subring containing the
elements and closed under the given functions. All the possible
ways of writing down elements made up from the f(n)’s by
applying the g(z, m)’s and addition and multiplication can be
indexed in a recursive way independent of any special char-
acter of f and g. Thus, I say that the subring of this inductive
domain is the range of a parametrically definable sequence
of elements. The conclusion follows by 1.9.
     It of course follows that no non-archimedean inductive
domain can be a finitely generated ring. Further, no finite
number of definable functions can be of any help in generating
the whole domain. This fact at once rules out many standard
algebraic ways of obtaining domains which would be inductive.
      § 2. Function rings. Let Z be the ring of integers, and
let I be an infinite index set. (The cardinal number of I
should not be too large because of some technical reasons.
Cardinals such as x), 2%°, 9280 are quite suitable.) By Z/ we shall
understand the complete direct power of Z with index J, that
is the ring of all functions from J into Z with the usual point-
wise operations. Notice that Z! is not integral domain and
only is endowed with a partial ordering rather than a linear
ordering (the pointwise partial ordering, of course). Now Z! has
 many ideals, and in particular it has many prime ideals P
which give integral domains Z//P. Maximal ideals M are prime,
but Z// is always a field and not an inductive domain.
240                                      D. Scott

Consider       then   the   question     whether      any   homomorphic    images
of Z are inductive domains. Projection of Z! onto a particular
coordinate gives Z as an image. The corresponding ideal of
Z? is principal. Indeed all principal prime ideals of Z/ are
either of this form or come from the composition of a projection
of Z onto Z followed by a homomorphism onto Z/(p), where
p is a prime. These homomorphisms are not interesting. What
needs to be investigated is whether a quotient Z//P, where
P is a non-principal ideal, is ever inductive. Since maximal
ideals did not yield the desired result, one should apply the
principle of passing from one extreme to another.
      THEOREM 2.1. If P is a non-principal minimal prime ideal
of 21, then ZI/P is a non-archimedean inductive domain of
uncountable       cardinality.
       To understand        the hypothesis          of 2.1 better, recall the fact
that the class of prime ideals of a ring is closed under the
intersection of chains. Hence, by Zorn’s Lemma every prime
ideal contains a minimal prime. Now it is very easy to con-
struct in Z? a maximal ideal which contains no principal prime
ideals simply by taking a maximal extension of the ideal
of those functions in Z/ which are zero on all but a finite
number of coordinates. These two applications of Zorn’s Lemma
show that the hypothesis is not vacuous. However, a closer
analysis of the notion of a minimal prime ideal will show that
so    many     uses   of the     axiom     of   choice   were   unnecessary.
     Suppose that & is any ring with unit. We shall say that &
has enough idempotents if there is a function e: R>        such
that for all z,y in & the following equations are satisfied:
         (i) e(0) =0;
        (li)   e(a-y) = e(a)- e(y);
       (iii)   e(e(x)) = e(a);
     (iv) e(a@)-v =a,
     It is easy to show from these conditions that if x7 = a,
then e(z) =, that e(v)? =e(x), and that the function e is
unique. Professor I. Kaplansky pointed out to the author
that the existence of the function e is equivalent to assuming
that the annihilator of every element of R is a principal ideal
generated by an idempotent.                He    had used this latter condition
in investigating minimal prime ideals in another connection.
It is clear that integral domains have enough idempotents,
for set e(x) equal to 0, if ¢ = 0, and equal to 1,if #0. Also
                         On constructing models for arithmetic                      241

Zi has such a function e: if     ris in Z/, then e(z) is the char-
acteristic function of the non-zero coordinates of #. (In fact,
the class of rings satisfying the condition is closed under
arbitrary direct product.)
     Lema 2.2, If R has enough idempotents, and P is a prime
ideal of R, then P is minimal if and only if e(P)CP.
      Remark. The condition given in 2.2 means that P is
closed under e, or in other words the homomorphism determined
by P also preserves the function e. If e(P) CP, it is easy to
see that        P = R-e(P), that is, P is completely determined by
the idempotents it contains. Also, e(P) will be a prime ideal
in the Boolean algebra of idempotents of FR.
     Proof of 2.2 (in outline). Let P be any prime ideal.
Consider
                         QO=e'P)             = {we R:    e(ale P}.

By direct computation one proves that QC P, Q is a prime
ideal, and e(Q) CQ. Hence, if P is minimal, then P =@ and
e(P)C P. Next if e(P) C P and not minimal, take P, C P which
is a minimal prime. Now e(P,) CP, by the first argument,
and e(P,) C e(P). But e(P,) is a maximal ideal in the Boolean
algebra of idempotents. Hence e(P,) = e(P), and so P, = P,
a contradiction.
      COROLLARY 2.3. The function e gives a one-one corre-
spondence between the minimal prime ideals of R and the prime
ideals of the Boolean algebra of idempotents of R making principal
ideals correspond to principal ideals.
     Next the partial ordering of Z? must be related to the
structure of the homomorphic images by minimal prime ideals.
The ring Z/ is a special case of a ring R partially ordered by
idempotents in the sense that R has enough idempotents and
in addition possesses a function p: RF      such that for all
x,y in R the following equations are satisfied:
         (i)     p(x). p(—z) = 9;
        (ii)     p(v)+ p(—2) = e(2);
       (ill)     p(z+y)-p(—2):    p(—y) = 9;
       (iv)      p(w-y) = p(x): p(y) + p(—2): p(—y).
The partial          ordering     of     R    may      now   be   introduced   by   the
definition:
                     x<y        if and       only if    p(r—y)=0,
Infinitistic   Methods                                                                16
v4?                                   D.    Scott


and the desired properties of the relation follow easily from
the above equations. If R is an ordered integral domain set
p(x) = 1, if    > 0, and p(x) = 0, if e <0. In the ring Z/, p(x)
for « in Z! is the characteristic function of the positive co-
ordinates of z. In as much as the ordering of an integral domain
need not be unique, the same R may possess many different:
such functions p, even though the function e is unique. Notice
that the class of rings partially ordered by idempotents is
closed under direct products.
     As a matter of fact, in the ring Z/ the function p is uniquely
determined, for Z7 is quadratically partially ordered in the sense
that each element x in Z! can be written in the form

      z=        yi2    »'4,2     where‘               we
                                                  Y;-2;  =90      for ae   ‘os
                                                                           t,j<n.
           <n         j<n

Hence,     from the equations          (i)-(iv) one         can prove

                                pla) = (Sy).      t<n

In other words, the non-negative elements of Z/ are just the
sums of (four) squares. Notice also that Z/ is discretely partially
ordered in the sense that for each # in Z/,
                            if x>0,        then         w>e(x).
      Consider now a homomorphic image of a ring # partially
ordered by idempotents. From the characterization of the
function p, it is a simple matter to show that if the homo-
morphism preserves the function e, then it must also preserve
the function p. Hence, the image ring can also be partially
ordered by idempotents. In particular, if the image is an
integral domain and if the function e is preserved, then the
image is an ordered integral domain; further, if RF is quadratically
and discretely partially ordered by idempotents, then this image
is a quadratically and discretely ordered domain. The next
proposition can now be established at once by making use
of 1.7 and 2.2.
      PROPOSITION 2.4. 1f KR is quadratically and discretely par-
tially ordered by idempotents, and if P is an ideal, then R/P is
a formally real integral domain if and only if P is a minimal
prime ideal,
      AS a consequence of 2.4 we see that 2.1 cannot be improved:
the   only inductive domains that are images of Z/ are those
                         On constructing       models for arithmetic                             243

obtained by minimal primes. Of course, we have not vet seen
why every such image is inductive. There is no room here for
the full proof of 2.1, for in any case a more general result with
all details is to appear elsewhere. But the main outlines of
the method can be indicated.
     Let P be a minimal prime of Z/. By 2.2 and 2.3, e(P) is
a prime ideal in the algebra of idempotents of Z/, The algebra
of idempotents of Z/ is nothing more than the Boolean algebra
of   all    subsets   of    J,    where      sets    have         been     replaced    by       their
characteristic functions. Let 8B be the corresponding prime
(maximal) ideal in the algebra of all subsets of J. The fact
that e(P) completely determines P may now be expressed
in the following equivalence which holds for all # in Z/:
                xeP        if and only         if     Wels             7% =O}EP.
Further all the basic operations and relations in Z!/P                                      can be
translated into this set language as follows:
              r/P=y/P            if and      only    if         Gel:      am =y    fe B;
              2/P <y/P           if and only if                 {iel: a <yj}Ee PB;
     2/P+y/P=2/P                 if and only if                 (iel:     a+y,=2}€DB:
     a[fP   -y/P=2/P             if and only if                 Wel:      a y =a       }e PB.
      Having these formulas to begin the induction, one now
proves by a straight forward method of elimination of quanti-
fiers that for every first-order formula © of elementary ordered
ring theory
     @(2/P,y/P,...)          holds in Z1/P           if and            only if
                                       {ftel: O(x;,y;,...)                holds in ZheP.
      This method proves that not only is Z//P inductive, but
that Z//P and Z satisfy exactly the same first-order sentences.
Even stronger is the conclusion that Z//P is isomorphic to an
elementary extension of Z in the sense of Tarski-Vaught [22],
where Z is embedded in Z!/P by use of the constant sequences
in Z!. Actually, all these consequences hold for an arbitrary
integral domain D in place of Z, and there is a generalization
to any      relational     system       as    shown            in Frayne-Morel-Scott             [4].
However, certain special properties of Z were obviously necessary
to apply 2.4. The proof that Z7/P is uncoutable involves certain
technical details about the relation of the cardinality.of J to the
structure      of P   and        can   be    found        in    [4].
                                                                                                  16*
 Odd                                          D.   Seott

          One   of the        most    pleasant     features    of 2.1 is that a method
 for constructing inductive domains can be stated in ordinary
 algebraical terms with a minimum of machinery. However,
 one feels disappointment upon learning that no independence
 results can be obtained this way for the new inductive domains
 share the same elementary properties with the ring of integers.
 Thus in the hope that something may come out of these ideas
 one may ask whether other kinds of function rings can lead
 to inductive domains.
       Several rings at once come to mind, and all of them turn
 out to be quadratically and discretely partially ordered by
idempotents. These rings are the following:
       (1) the ring PR of all primitive recursive functions;
       (2) the ring GR of all general recursive funetions;
      (3) the ring GR(A) of all functions general recursive in some
definable (arithmetical) predicate A;
      (4) the ring DF of all algebraically (first-order) definable
functions from integers to integers:
      (5) the ring CN of all definable constants (u-terms without
free variables) in the formal first-order theory of arithmetic
(inductive domains ).
     The last mentioned ring does not degenerate simply to
the integers in view of the incompleteness of the axioms for
inductive domains. For let ® be any sentence undecidable
on the basis of the axioms. Then the following property defines
an     idempotent        in     ON:

                               [tv =1AG]v[~e=0A               494].

Indeed all the idempotents of CN can be given definitions
of this form.
     By virtue of 2.4 we know exactly which homomorphic
images of these rings can conceivably yield inductive domains.
The results, however, are not comforting. In joint work with
8. Feferman [3] it has been shown that if P is a non-principal
minimal prime, then none of the rings PR/P, GR/P, GR(A)/P
is inductive. In fact, in each separate case there is a cor-
responding single formula provable by means of the induction
axioms which fails in all of the homomorphic images. This is
closely     related      to     the    fact    that   one     cannot   derive   all   true
sentences        about integers from any class of true sentences
involving       a fixed, bounded number of changes of quantifiers,
                      On   constructing    models    for arithmetic                          245


for even some instances of the induction axioms are not so
derivable (cf. Kreisel [8] and Ryll-Nardzewski [16]).
      In the case of the ring DF all quotients DF/P, P a minimal
prime, are isomorphic to elementary extensions of Z. This is
simply an algebraic reformulation of the original result of
Skolem (cf. [19]) and, in a slightly different form, was first
called to the author’s attention by S. Kochen (cf. [6]). To
understand the connection with Skolem's method, recall that
we have shown in 2.3 that the minimal prime ideals correspond
to the prime ideals in the Boolean algebra of idempotents.
Now the idempotents of DF are simply the characteristic
functions of (first-order) definable sets of integers, which form
a denumerable Boolean algebra. The non-principal ideals of
a denumerable algebra can always be given an ordered basis.
For example if % is a non-principal prime ideal in the algebra
of definable sets, then there exists a sequence of sets X,«$
such    that    X, # Xnzi        and       X,C      Yy1:         for     all     n=0,1,2,...
Further the sets X, form a basis in the sense that Ye              if
and only if ¥Y C X, for some n, where ¥ is in the algebra.
Now since we have an algebra of sets, let a set S be chosen
so that S = {59, 8:5 82) «+; Sny +} ADd 8, € Xn4i—Ay. It is easy
to conclude that S is not (first-order) definable. However,
S& does determine , for one may show directly that for all Y
in the algebra, ¥ « P if and only if ¥ 4 S is finite. In particular,
if f,ge DF, then
       HP =/P        if and only if there is an N such that
                                         f(8n) = g(Sn) for alln>y.

And similar equivalences hold for the relations //P < g/P, ete.
Thus the sequence s, is exactly the comparing function used
by Skolem to divide the definable functions into congruence
classes.
      In the case of the ring of functions GR the Boolean algebra
is the algebra of recursive sets and many non-principal prime
ideals correspond to sets similar to the S above but which may
be taken as the complements of the recursively enumerable
 macimal simple sets constructed by Friedberg in [5]. It was this
remark showing the interesting way in which Skolem’s method
for constructing non-archimedean domains could be applied to
the recursive functions that was made to the author by D. Ten-
 nenbaum       and     stimulated         much      of     our         present    research     in
 these directions.
   246                                                D.   Scott

          It would seem fair to say that the method
                                                     of Theorem 2.1
   for obtaining non-archimedean inductive
                                              domains is the correct
   generalization of Skolem’s method to non-
                                              denumerable function
   rings,
          Finally, we may examine the ring CN, which
                                                        was included
   only     for     illustration.          The       minimal           prime     ideals       of   this    ring
  correspond exactly to the complete exten
                                            sions of the axioms
  for inductive domains (because of the
                                          nature of the Boolean
  algebra of idempotents). The quotiens
                                           CN/P are exactly the
  prime models for arithmetic considered by
                                             A. Robinson in [14].
        § 3. Polynomial rings. In an attempt to const
                                                         ruct models
  for any theory one very attractive proce
                                              dure is to carry out
  the construction by successive adjunction
                                              s of new elements,
  as in the construction of the algebraic
                                              closure of a field or
  indeed as in some proofs of the Completene
                                                   ss Theorem for
  first-order logic. In the case of arithmetic
                                                  we shall see that
  this method cannot be applied without
                                               discrimination. The
 first question that comes to mind is wheth
                                                  er an arbitrary
 discretely ordered domain can be extended
                                                    to an inductive
 domain. To this end note first of all two
                                                simple facts.
       PROPOSITION 3.1. (i) In a discretely ordered
                                                      domain no ele-
 ment can be both even and odd;
         (ii) in     an   inductive          domain            every     element         is   either      even
 or odd.
      Proof. (ii) is obvious; for (i) notice                               that if 27 — 2y+,
 then 2(4—y) = 1. Hence, «—y> 0, and
                                                                           therefore “—y >,
 which is impossible,
         THEOREM 3.2.              There        is    a    discretely          ordered        domain       in
 which     the equation
                                           PHtil              = Py
has a solution.
       This statement              at once answers               our question            above     for we
have      the
       COLLORARY 3.3, The discretely ordered domain
                                                    of Theorem 3.2
cannot     be     extended    to    an     inductive           domain.
       Proof.       One      need        only        recall     that     from      knowing          every
element is either even or odd, it follows
                                          that the polynomial
w-+-r-+1 takes on only odd values. The
                                            conslusion follows
from     3.1.
                         On constructing models for arithmetic                             PLT


      It   remains        now      to       establish     the   existence      of   required
domain.
        Lema 3.4. If R is an ordered domain, then there is
a unique ordering of the polynomial domain R(t] of polynomials
in one indeterminate t such that t > r for all constant polynomeals
ye R. If in addition R is discretely ordered, then under this order-
ing   so is R{t].
      Notice that if p(t)« R[t] and r<p(t)<s for r,seR,
then p(t) is constant, ie., p(t)e« R also. The ordering of R{t]
is of course always non-archi medean under the stipulation in 3.4.
      Proof of 3.2. Let @ be the (ordered) field of rationals and
consider        the   polynomial            domain      Q[t],   ordered   as   in   3.4.   Let

                                    w= 4(2@+t+1),
and let D be the ordered subdomain of Q[t] generated by ¢
and u. If we can show that D is discretely ordered, the proof
will be complete.
     First of all it is easy to verify that D consists exactly of
those polynomials of the form


                            p(t)        +         SEE HELD,
                                              a

                                        NV Galt)         atk
                                            k=0
 where p(t) « Z[t] is an integral polynomial and the a,(t) have
 as coefficients only 0 or 1. If in D there were an element be-
 tween 0 and 1, we would find in Z[t] an inequality of the form

                 0 < 2p            (ty — NW at-*ayay(P t+)                < 2",

 But this would mean that the polynomial mentioned is a con-
 stant in Z(t]. Reducing modulo 2 we find that the polynomial
 a,(t)(t? -+t+1)" is constant in Zt], where Z, is the two element
_ Ting. However, the polynomial f-+-¢-+1 is neither a divisor of
  zero nor a unit in Zt]. Assuming that if » #0, then in the
  original polynomial a,(t) = 0. we conclude that n = 0. In other
 words     we     have    in Z[f],

                                   0 < 2p(t)—a,(t) <1,
 which is impossible in the discretely ordered domain Z[t].
      In general, even though polynomial rings are seen to yield
 many discretely ordered domains, they do not seem to lead
   248                                              D.   Scott

   very directly to inductive domains. In
                                          a (negative) direction
   somewhat different from 3.2 we have the
                                            next result.
           THEOREM             3.5.     If R is a formally       real domain   and D C Rit]
   is quadratically                 ordered,    then DCR.
         Before giving the proof, notice that 1.7
                                                     shows at once
   that if D were discretely ordered, D must
                                                 be isomorphic to
   a subdomain of R, for there is a homomorp
                                              hism h: DR such
   that h (p(t) = p(0). However, the stronger
                                                conclusion can be
   derived by making use of some simple ideas
                                                   from the theory
  of valuations.
        Let D by any ordered domain and consider
                                                         a function
  w: D+Zu {co}. This function w is called
                                                  an integral order
  preserving valuation over D if the folowing
                                               four conditions are
  Satistied for all elements xL,ye D:
           (i) (0) = —co,
          (i)         w(a-y) = w(x) +w(y),
         (iii) w(e+y) < max (w(x), w(y)),
         (iv)         if     O<a<y,   S wy).   then W(L)
 These conditions on a valuation are slightly
                                                different from the
 ordinary ones (in, Say, van der Waerden
                                                [25], p. 252-254)
 because the non-archimedean elements empha
                                                  sized here are
 infinitely large rather than infinitely small.
                                                 Notice that con-
 dition (iv) may be replaced by
       (iv’) if x,y >0, then w(e+y) = max (w(x), w(y)).
Notice also that (i)-(iv) imply that if w+
                                              0, then w(x) > 0.
Such a valuation is trivial if it takes on
                                           only the values —oco
and 0. The essential step in proving 3.5 may
                                                be formulated as
follows:
      LEMMA 3.6. Yo quadratically ordered domai
                                                      n can have
a@ non-trivial integral order-preserving valua
                                               tion.
      Proof. Suppose that D is the domain and w
                                                     the valuation.
Choose an element xr so that w(xr) is-&
                                          minimum among                               the
non-zero (positive) values of w. Since
                                        w(x) = w(—.2), we                            may
assume v > 0. Now x=)’ yi, and by (iv’) above
                                              w(a) =maxw(y}).
                     t<n
                                                      i<n
Clearly we can assume that yo > yi for i<n.
                                                   Hence u (Yo)
>w(y})          for        i< nm,     and      w(x) = w(y3) = 2W(Yo).      Now    yy #0,
and 80 w(Y) << w(z). Whence,                       w(y,) =0 = 2W (Yo) = w(x), which
is a contradiction.
                         On     constructing     models    for arithmetic                     249


     Proof of 3.5. In the polynomial domain F[t] define a func-
tion « such that w(p(t)) = —oo if p(t) = 0, otherwise w(p(t)) =
the degree of p(t). Notice that p(t) « R if and only if w(p(t)) =
—oo or 0. Thus, if we can show that « restricted to the quadra-
tically ordered subdomain D is an order preserving valuation,
then an application of 3.6 will complete the proof. Now the
conditions (i), (il), (iii) are satisfied throughout #{t]. Thus it
remains only to verify condition (iv), or better (iv’), on D.
Let   rv,     ye D. x.y >0.          Then      x =    ) p,(t)? and     y = > a(t).           Thus
                                                     t<n                    i<m
the coefficients of the highest powers of ¢ in both x and y are
sums of squares, and hence in r-y the larger of these two
powers must still appear, because no non-trivial sum of squares
is zero in AR. In other words w(r—y) = max (w(x), w(y)); as
was to be shown.
      Comparing 3.5 and 3.6 with 1.10 we see that inductive
domains cannot be finitely generated or even be included in
finitely generated rings in a non-trivial way. Indeed it might
be possible to give a common generalization of these results,
but the author has been unable to isolate the essential fact that
seems to be contained in all of these proofs. In any case, one
has many danger signals to watch for in any attempt at con-
structing an inductive domain.
      In 3.2 the discretely ordered domain constructed fails to
satisfy the condition that every element is either even or odd.
One might ask whether a discretely ordered domain in which
finite congruences are solvable can be extended to an inductive
domain. To be more specific, we shall say that finite congru-
ences are solvable in D if for each m, D/(m) is isomorphic to
Z/(m); ie., each element in D congruent to 0,1,..., or m—1
modulo m. Note first that the square root of 2 is irrational in
the following          sense.
      PROPOSITION             3.7.   In   an    inductive     domain    there     are   no   non-
zero solutions         of the equation.
                                               f=    2,

     Again a polynomial ring leads to a counterexample.
     THEOREM 3.8. There is a discretely ordered domain in which
all finite congruences are solvable and in which the equation
                                               f=    Pu

has   a     non-zero    solution.
lo
 Or   an)                         D.    Scott


     Proof. Let Re be the field of real numbers and let D be
the subdomain of Re[t] consisting of those polynomials p(t)
such that p(0) « Z (i.e., integral constant term). Re[t] is ordered
as in 3.4, and it is easy to show that D is discretely ordered
and that finite congruences are solvable in D. However, wu = }'2t
is in D, which completes the proof.
     A way of recasting the results in 3.2 and 3.8 is to say
that both of the (universal) sentences

(1)                          P4+t+1 ~2Qu;
(2)                   P=2u             imphes    t=0,

are independent of the axioms for discretely ordered domains.
In fact, the independence result in the case of (2) is slightly
stronger. Both (1) and (2) are provable by the induction axiom
for inductive domains, but every such application of induction
axiom seems to require a formula with at least one quantifier
in the inductive hypothesis. Hence we may ask whether these
sentences can be proved from the axioms of discretely ordered
domains by means of a rule of induction applied only to free
variable formulas.
      In other words, if we take statement (2) above as an
example, the fact that the square root of 2 is irrational can
be expressed by a universal sentence involving only the functions
of addition and multiplication. Now the simple algebraic prop-
erties of these operations are embodied in the axioms for
discretely ordered domains, and the rule of free variable in-
ductions allows us to deduce further consequences from these
axioms which correspond to directly understandable algebraic
properties   of the   integers.   However,      in   every   proof   of   (2) in
ordinary number theory some new functions must be intro-
duced by recursive definitions to carry out the argument
(e.g. the ged(x,y) or 2”, ete.). Can this necessity for using
notions in the proof that do not appear in the statement of
the problem be made precise? One method is to ask whether (2)
can be proved by free variable induction. Presumably the
answer is no, but the demonstration is lacking.
      This question about proving (2) was first raised by Skolem
in [19], and similar questions have been emphasized by
Kreisel in [27]. The only positive results known to the author
are contained in the interesting paper of Shoenfield [17] where
the problem is treated in the theory of addition alone.
                   On    constructing   models   for arithmetic        251


Unfortunately. none of Shoenfield’s models for addition can
be ordered, and so his method does not seem to generalize.
Is it possible that the domain constructed in the proof of 3.2
satisfies the rule of free variable induction? The author was
not able to decide thi§ question.
      The question discussed above is closely related to Hilbert’s
Problem about which diophantine equations have solutions in
the integers. Hilbert’s Problem can be rephrased as asking
which universal sentences in terms of addition, multiplication
and order are true in the domain of integers. It seems unlikely
that there is a decision method for such sentences (cf. Ro-
binson [15] and Davis-Putnam [1]), but even if Hilbert’s Prob-
lem is not recursively solvable, one still would like to know
what is the relation between the universal sentences true in
 the integers and those provable by the induction axiom. (If
every true universal sentence is provable, then Hilbert’s Prob-
lem is recursively solvable.)
      In particular, can the provable universal sentences about
 all inductive domains be characterized in a natural way making
 use of simple algebraically meaningful rules involving only
 universal sentences?      The rule of free variable induction
 probably is  inadequate ,  but it would seem to be of real interest
to   understand    the   complete       situation.
     The questions about universal sentences are also closely
related to the extension problem. A general theorem in [4]
shows that if D and D’ are two domains, then every universal
sentence true in D is true in D’ if and only if D’ is isomorphic
to a subdomain of some D!/P where P is a minimal prime
ideal of D'. Looking back to 2.1 and its generalizations men-
tioned in the discussion, we conclude that a domain D can be
extended to an inductive domain if and only if every universal
sentence true in all inductive domains is true in D. (For a simpler
discussion of this type of conclusion cf. Tarski [21)).
     § 4. Recursive and definable rings. If a denumerable ring &
is put into a one-one correspondence with the integers Z by
a function e: Z>R, then the addition and multiplication of &
induce two functions a, u:       ZxZ—Z by the relations
       e(n)—e(m)     = e(a(n, mj},         — e(n)-e(m) = e(u(n, m)).
 The functions a and pare called the addition and multiplication
 tables of R relative to the enumeration e. We may ask whether
 algebraic properties of R influence the nature of the possible
 259                                          D.   Scott


 addition and multiplication tables which the ring may possess.
 In particular, can the a and yu ever be recursive for a suitable ¢?
 or can they be functions on Z algebraically                                    (first-order) defi-
 nable in the doman Z? In these two cases                                       we shall say for
 short that the ring & is recursive or definable. An analysis of
 the original proof in Gédel [10] or Hilbert-Bernays [9] of the
 Completeness           Theorem        allows      us      to        conclude    the     following
        PROPOSITION           4.1.    There        exist         definable       non-archimedean.
inductive          domains.
     It should be stressed that the proof of 4.1 does not require
the method of arithmetization of syntax which plays such
a central role in the proof of incompleteness in Godel [11]. For
we need only note that there are finitely axiomatizable theories
involving other predicate constants beyond those for addition
and multiplication from which the inductive axiom schema
for arithmetic can be deduced. A system close to the set-theory
of Bernays-Gédel can be used for example. Call the axiom for
this (consistent) theory A. To this sentence we shall adjoin
a new sentence involving a new monadic predicate symbol P
as follows:
            [P (0) A(2)LP(@) > P(@+1)AP(e—1)]A7 (a) P(a)} .
There are several ways to show that if A is consistent, then the
resulting conjunction is also consistent. It is at once clear
that in every model for this extended theory the domain involved
is a non-archimedean                 inductive      domain.             Now     it is exactly        the
point of Gédel’s proof of completeness that one may write
out directly a definition in aritmetic of predicates satisfying
this single sentence.          .
     In other words, an explicitly definable non-archimedean
inductive domain can be given. Of course, the actual definitions
required would be far from short. In particular the model in
arithmetic is constructed as the union of finite “partial” models,
and the structure of these finite systems must be described in
algebraic terms. This description can be carried out by the use
of the Chinese remainder theorem for representing finite sets,
sequences, and functions in arithmetic. Of course, it is just the
use    of   this     kind     of representation                 of    sequences        that     permits
the arithmetization of syntax; however, the description of the
finite relational systems is far simpler than the explicit defini-
tions of the necessary syntactical notions. The author                                        definitely
feels that a complete                proof of 4.1 would                  require       much      less in
                          On constructing models for arithmetic                                  253

the way of preparation and comprehension than the usual
proofs of incompleteness of arithmetic. We note next that
Tennenbaum has proved in [24] the following result first proved
by Feferman [2].
      THEOREM            4.2.   Every           definable     non-archimedean            inductive
                                          #       ae                       e              *       °




domain       satisfies     a sentence false in the integers.
      The proof shows that the sentence in question is one of
the instances of the formula that defines the addition table
a(n, m) of the definable domain. A slightly different method
of proof not requiring the more advanced ideas from recursive
function theory is given in [18]. There the sentence in question
is constructed by a simple diagonal argument. The method of
proof applies when there are additional predicates besides ad-
dition and multiplication giving a common          generalization
of 4.2 and the result of Rabin [13] (Theorem                               6). We     thus obtain
as a consequence of 4.1 and 4.2 the Incompleteness Theorem.
Indeed, this method is adequate to show that any theory which
has   a set     of axioms            definable         in   arithmetic         is inadequate     for
proving all true sentences of arithmetic—a result which is of
course already known. The method of proof of incompleteness
outlined here should                 be       compared       with   that       of   Kreisel   in [7]
and Wang in [26].
     Another result of Tennenbaum                             [24] closely related to 4.2
is as follows:
      THEOREM            4.3.   No            non-archimedean        inductive         domain         is
FECUISIVE.
     Thus, if we try to construct a non-archimedean domain to
prove incompleteness by showing by means of the model that
a certain true sentence is independent of the inductive axioms,
then this domain cannot have effectively computable addition
and multiplication tables. For example, the domain constructed
in 3.2 is recursive and hence not inductive. (Actually it fails
to be inductive for a very simple reason as shown in the proof
of 3.2.) Hence,            we   have           a new    warning     sign in our         search    for
models of arithmetic: Do not use addition and multiplication
tables that are too simple. Nevertheless the investigation of
certain recursive discretely ordered domains may be of real
interest, for these may be models for useful fragments of arithme-
tic, as in the problem of Skolem mentioned in Section 3.
      Another way to phrase the content of £.3 uses the sequences
of finite residues by finite moduli of elements of an inductive
  2od                                                   D. Scott

  domain. In the notation of Specker [20], the sequence                                                                 is
  (41, 4M, 43, 44,...) Where a is some element of the domain and                                                       Bn.
  is the residue modulo 7. We can interpret a, as an actual integer,
 where            0 <a,<,              rather           than    as         a    (finite)      element       of    the
 domain. With this terminology the result of Tennenbaum
 shows that in any non-archimedean inductive domain there nust
 exist an element a such that the sequence of residues (Q,, A, Ag, ...)
  is not recursive. This rephrasing higlights in a different way
 the complexity of inductive domains that are not the integers.
       The author sincerely hopes that the discussion presented
 here, which is rather weighted to the side of negative results,
 is not discouraging. Even though the problem of constructing
 inductive domains is clearly extremely difficult to solve in
 useful ways, a deeper study of this question can surely bring us
 better understanding of the nature of arithmetic.

                                                       References

        [1] M. Davis and H. Putnam, Reduction of Hilbert’s tenth problem,
 Journ.   Symb. Logic 23 (1958), pp. 183-187.
        [2] 8S. Feferman,    Arithmetically definable models of formalized
arithmetic, Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 5 (1958), pp. 679-680 (Abstract 550-21).
        [3] — D. Scott and 8. Tennenbaum, Models of arithmetic through
function rings, Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 6 (1959), pp. 173-174 (Abstract
 556-31).
       [4] T. Frayne, A. C. Morel and D. Scott, Reduced direct products,
to appear.
       [5] R. M. Friedberg,    Three theorems on recursive enumeration,
Journ. Symb. Logie 23 (1958), pp. 309-316.
           [6]    S.     Kochen,       Filtration        systems,         I,    Notices     Amer.      Math.     Soc.
5 (1958), p. 605 (Abstract 549-24).
        [7] G. Kreisel, Note on arithmetic models for consistent formulae
of the predicate calculus. Part I, Fund. Math. 37 (1950), pp. 265-285.
        [8] — Some concepts concerning formal systems of number theory,
Math, Zeit. 57 (1952), pp. 1-12.
        [9] D. Hilbert     and P. Bernays,    Grundlagen der Mathematik,
vol. 2, Berlin 1939.
      [10] K. Godel, Die Vollstandigkeit der Aziome des logischen Funk-
tionenkalkiils,           Monatshefte            fir     Mathematik              und       Physik      37   (1930),
pp.   349-360.
       (11] —            Uber formal     unentscheidbare             Sttze der Principia              Mathematica
und     verwandter         Systeme,     I,       Monatshefte        fir        Mathematik       und    Physik     38
(1931),     pp.        173-198,
         [12]     E.    Mendelson,           A    proposed     nonstandard             model,   Notices        Amer.
Math. Soc. 6 (1959), pp. 143-144 (Abstract 554-31).
         [13] M. O. Rabin,             Arithmetical extensions with prescribed                         cardinality,
Indag.      Math. 21 (1959),           pp. 439-446.
                           On constructing models for arithmetic                            255

      [14] A. Robinson,     Jodel theory and non-standard arithmetic, this
volume, pp. 265-303.
      [15] R. M. Robinson,       <Arithmetical representations of recursively
enumerable sets, Journ. Symb. Logic 21 (1956), pp. 162-186.
      [16] C. Ryll-Nardzewski, The role of the axiom of induction in
elementary arithmetic, Fund. Math. 39 (1953), pp. 239-263.
      [17] J. R. Shoenfield, Open sentences and the induction ariom,
Journ. Symb. Logic 23 (1958), pp. 7-12.
      [18] D. Scott, On a theorem of Rabin, to appear.
      {[19] T. Skolem, Peano’s axioms and models od arithmetic, Mathe-
matical interpretations of formal systems, Amsterdam 1955, pp. 1-14.
      (20] E. Specker und R. Mac Dowell, Modelle der Arithmetik, this
volume, pp. 257-263.
      [21] A. Tarski, Contributions to the theory of models, I-II, Indag.
Math. 16 (1954), pp. 572-588.
      (22] A. Tarski and R.L. Vaught, Arithmetical extenstons of relational
systems, Compositio Math. 13 (1957), pp. 81-102.
      (23] A. Tarski, What is elementary geometry? The axiomatic method,
with special reference to geometry and physics, Amsterdam 1957, pp. 16-29.
         [24]   S.   Tennenbaum,            Non-archimedean    systems   of   arithmetic,    to
appear.
      [25] B.        L.   van      der     Waerden,    Moderne     Algebra,    3rd   edition,
Berlin     1950.
         (26] H. Wang,           Undecidable sentences generated by semantic paradozes,
Journ.      Symb. Logie         20 (1955), pp. 31-43.
         [27] G. Kreisel,         Applications of mathematical logic to various bran-
ches of mathematics,            Colloque    de la Logique     Mathématique,     Paris   1954,
pp. 37-49,

THE   UNIVERSITY          OF CHICAGO
