                       A New Category?
          Domains, Spaces and Equivalence Relations

                                Dana S. Scott
                         School of Computer Science
                         Carnegie Mellon University


                         dana.scott@cs.cmu.edu

                   Version 1: Draft of 31 December 1996
                   Version 2: Corrected on 19 April 1998



1 Introduction.
The familiar categories           and        , consisting of sets and arbitrary
mappings and of topological spaces and continuous mappings, have many
well known closure properties. For example, they are both complete and
cocomplete, meaning that they have all (small) limits and colimits. They
are well-powered and co-well-powered, meaning that collections of subobjects
and quotients of objects can be represented by sets. They are also nicely
related, since       can be regarded as a full subcategory of        , and the for-
getful functor that takes a topological space to its underlying set preserves
limits and colimits (but reflects neither).
    The category          is also a cartesian closed category, meaning that the
function-space construct or the internal hom-functor is very well behaved, in
the sense that the functor          is adjoint to        for all objects . How-
ever, it has been known for a long time that in               no such assertion
is available, because in general it is not possible to assign a topology to
the set of continuous functions making this adjointness valid—except un-
der some special conditions on the space . Many remedies have been

                                        1
proposed, notably, (a) cutting down to compactly generated spaces, or (b) ex-
panding the category to the category of filter spaces (or a related kind of
limit space). These are interesting suggestions, but both have some draw-
backs. Suggestion (a) applies only to Hausdorff spaces, and suggestion
(2)—which the author considers the more interesting—introduces very
unfamiliar spaces at the higher types (i.e., after iterating the function-space
construct several times). It remains to be seen whether the suggestion of
this paper can be regarded as more concrete or more helpful.
    The author’s solution to the problem of cartesian closedness is moti-
vated by domain theory. The (new?) category is formed from the cate-
gory          of topological -spaces by using spaces together with arbi-
trary equivalence relations, to form the category, to be called called           ,
where the mappings are (suitable equivalence classes of) continuous map-
pings which preserve the equivalence relations. (A more precise definition
will be given below.) Let us call these spaces equilogical spaces and the map-
pings equivariant. It seems surprising that this category has not been no-
ticed before—if in fact it has not. It is easy to see that      is complete and
cocomplete and that it embedds               as a full and faithful subcategory
(by taking the equivalence relation to be the identity relation).
    What is perhaps not so obvious is that             is indeed cartesian closed.
The proof of cartesian closedness outlined here uses old theorems in do-
main theory originally discovered by the author: in particular, an injective
property of algebraic lattices treated as topological spaces and the fact that
they form a cartesian closed category (along with continuous functions)1 .
Of course, algebraic lattices are just one of many cartesian closed cate-
gories proposed for domain theory—and not the most popular one. They
allow, however, for some helpful embeddings of -spaces.
    For a long time the author has been distressed that there are too many
proposed categories of domains and that their study has become too ar-
cane. He hoped that the idea of synthetic domain theory would be the nat-
ural solution—but that theory has been slowed by many technical prob-
lems. The related idea of axiomatic domain theory is likewise hampered
by the need to overcome technical difficulties. Despite very good work
in both these directions a final theory has not emerged—in the author’s
opinion. Perhaps some of the ideas that have been used in these other ap-
   1
    A more abstract, categorical proof can be found in the paper by Birkedal et al. to be
found at our WWW site mentioned below


                                           2
proaches can be transplanted to the study of        , which seems to be a
rich and fairly natural category with many subcategories. The basic idea
is to establish a typed -calculus once and for all, and then to single out
useful types (or domains) by means of special properties—just as is done
in several other branches of mathematics2 .


2         -Spaces and Algebraic Lattices.
Topological spaces will be considered as structures                   , where
is the set of points of the space, and where       is the set of open sets of .
We shall often write          , so as not to have to use a special letter for the
points of a space.

2.1 Definition. The neighborhood filter of a point                  of a topological
space is defined by the equation:



2.2 Definition. The spaces we shall be concerned with are the -spaces,
where the topology distinguishes the points. More precisely, a topological
space is a -space provided that for every pair of distinct points there is
an open set that contians one but not the other. Another way to say this
condition is to say that for all       it is the case that

                                      always implies

The category of all such spaces and continuous mappings between them
is denoted by       .

2.3 Definition. The specialization ordering of a topological space              is de-
fined by:
                           if, and only if,
for all           .
    2
    Along with my students Andrej Bauer, Lars Birkedal, and Jesse Hughes, and our col-
league Steven Awodey, we have started on this project, for the time being concentrating
on countably based spaces and the connections with interpretations of type theory and
higher-order intuitionistic logic by the realizability method.


                                          3
    It is obvious from the definitions that -spaces are partially ordered by
the specialization ordering. What may not be so obvious to those who
have been concerned mostly with Hausdorff spaces is that the specializa-
tion ordering can be interesting. For example, a very simple argument
shows that any given partial ordering can be reobtained from the topology
that uses the same set of points and takes as open sets the upward-closed
sets of elements. More interesting spaces come from complete lattices.
    Complete lattices will be considered as structures              , where
    partially orders and where every subset of has a least upper bound
(equivalently, a greatest lower bound). We write              , and we use
the usual notation for lattice operations (namely,           ). In order to
distinguish a special class of complete lattices, the algebraic lattices, we
need to pick out special elements of a lattice.

2.4 Definition. A compact (sometimes “finite” or “isolated”) element of a
complete lattice             is an element such that whenever
for a subset      , then           for a finite subset    . We denote the
set of compact elements of the lattice by          .

   It is easy to show that the least upper bound of a finite collection of
compact elements is again compact. In particular, the least element       of
a complete lattice is always compact—but no other elements need be in
general. In a finite lattice, all elements are compact. In the lattice of all
subsets of a set , the compact elements are exactly the finite subsets. Al-
gebraic lattices are distinguished as complete lattices with “enough” com-
pact elements.

2.5 Definition. A complete lattice is algebraic provided that every ele-
ment is determined by the compact elements it contains. This means that
         and           .                , always imply      .

    It should be noted that in an algebraic lattice, every element is the least
upper bound of the compact elements it contains. The typical examples
of algebraic lattices come from the study of algebraic systems (hence, the
name). More abstractly we define the well known notion of a closure sys-
tem. We need a preliminary definition.

2.6 Definition. A directed subset of a partially ordered set is a subset   such
that every finite subset of has an upper bound in .

                                       4
2.7 Definition. An algebraic closure system on a set is a family
closed under (i) arbitrary intersections (but note we must set the empty
intersection Ø       ), and (ii) unions of directed subfamilies.

    The most typical examples of algebraic closure systems are the fam-
ily of subgroups of a group, the family of ideals of a ring, and the family
of subspaces of a linear vector space. The downward closed subsets of a
partially ordered set form an algebraic closure system, as do the down-
ward closed, directed subsets. The deductively closed sets of formulae of
a logical system with finitary inference rules also form an algebraic closure
system. However, the closed subsets of a topological space in general do
not form an algebraic closure system (failing condition (ii)). We also note
that the intersection of any number of algebraic closure systems is again
such a system (all on a common fixed set).
    Associated with an algebraic closure system             is a closure opera-
tor, where the closure of a subset         is the intersection of all sets in
containing the set . The sets in are then just the “closed” sets equal to
their own closures.
    An algebraic closure system is—by definition—a complete lattice (un-
der the set-inclusion relation). It is always an algebraic lattice, since an
easy argument shows that the compact elements are the closures of finite
sets, and that there are enough of them. Conversely, a well known ar-
gument also shows that every abstract algebraic lattice is isomorphically
represented as an algebraic closure system: one takes the underlying set to
be the set      of compact elements and takes the collection of downward-
closed, directed sets of compact elements as the algebraic closure system.
Hence, thinking about algebraic lattices is the same as thinking about al-
gebraic closure systems—from the point of view of the partial ordering.
    What is the connection between lattices and -spaces? We are going to
show (in a well known proof) why every complete lattice is such a space,
and why the specialization ordering is the original partial ordering.

2.8 Definition. Let be a complete lattice. The -topology on the lattice is
defined as the collection of all upward closed subsets            such that
whenever            and            , then            for some finite subset
      . The collection of all such subsets is denoted by .


                                      5
2.9 Theorem. Given a complete lattice , the structure                 is a   -space
whose specialization ordering is exactly .

Proof: That     is closed under arbtrary unions and finite intersections
is very easy to check from the definition (but notice that the upward-
closedness property has to be invoked). To check the -property, one
has only to remark that if     , then we have



Since the open sets in     are upward closed, then       is included in the
specialization ordering. But the particular open sets displayed above are
sufficient to show that the inclusion of the specialization ordering in
holds as well. Q.E.D.

   Having established a topology, we can turn complete lattices into a
subcategory of the category of -spaces.

2.10 Definition. The category CLat of complete lattices consists of such
lattices and the functions that are continuous under the -topology.

   For complete lattices and , we remark that continuity of a function
            can be defined in lattice-theoretic terms as a mapping where



for all directed          Note, too, that continuous functions between
complete lattices are monotone in the sense of preserving the underlying
partial orderings.
   A “classical” result about monotone functions and complete lattices
concerns fixed points.

2.11 Theorem. [Knaster-Tarski-Davis-Kleene] A lattice is complete if, and
only if, every monotone self-function                      has a fixed point. In a
complete lattice the partially ordered set of fixed points of a self-function form a
complete lattice, and the least and greatest fixed points are, respectively,

                                       and

                                         6
In case the function   is continuous, the least fixed point is given by




    For the powerset spaces        the -topology is very easy to describe:
the open sets          are the families of “finite character”; that is, a subset
         belongs to if, and only if, some finite subset of belongs to .
This is the same as giving     the topology that corresponds to the product
topology on where the two-element set has the topology with one open
point and one closed point. The powerset spaces have an important role
as being able to embed every -space.

2.12 Theorem. [The Embedding Theorem] Given a -space , the mapping
          is a topological embedding of into considered as a space with
the -topology.

Proof: This is a well known, easy theorem. We have already remarked
that the mapping is an injection. To show that it is continuous, we only
have to show that the inverse image of the elementary open subsets of
      are open in . In fact, suppose that                        is a finite
subset of   . This determines as an open subset of      the following set:



All open sets are unions of such sets. The inverse image of the above set is
the set

But this set is equal to             , which is obviously open. Thus, the
mapping is indeed continuous.
   It remains to be proved that inverse mapping from the subspace of
      to the given space is also continuous. This amounts to showing
that the image of an open set in is open in the subspace. Let        . Its
image under the embedding is



But this last set is indeed the intersection of the image of the space with
the set                    , which is an open set of    . Q.E.D.

                                         7
   Powerset spaces also have another important property concerning con-
tinouous functions which is key for the definitions we will give in the next
section.

2.13 Theorem. [The Extension Theorem] If             is a subspace of a topological
space , and if                 is continuous, then the function has a continuous
extension to all the points of .

Proof: This theorem was noticed by the author in 1970/71. One proof re-
marks that the conclusion is obvious in case the set is a one-point set.
Since a continuous function                  is basically just an open subset
of , we just have to recall that every open subset of a subspace is a re-
striction of (or extends to) an open subspace of a superspace. Then, the
theorem must remain true if the range space is replaced by a product of
powerset spaces. Since, as a space,     is homeomorphic to the product of
the spaces        for      , the theorem follows for      .
    Another proof gives directly a formula for the extension of the function
               to a function              :



for all          . Of course, it has to be verified that this (well defined)
function    is a continuous extension of . Q.E.D.

     The author also pointed out that the Extension Theorem holds for all
continuous retracts of the powerset spaces—these are the continuous lat-
tices. We do not need to have their general theory reviewed here, inas-
much as we can make the necessary later definitions with a special class
of retracts—giving the algebraic lattices. Remember that every algebraic
closure system            has an associated closure operation               .
It is not difficult to show that is a continuous retract. More generally we
can consider the class of closure operations as in the following definition.

2.14 Definition. A continuous closure operation                      is a continu-
ous function such that                  .

   In the above definition we use the notation of the identity function and
the relationship         as a shorthand for the condition that

                                        8
holds for all subsets         . The main point here is that the above opera-
tors give us all algebraic closure systems (and, hence, all algebraic lattices)
as and vary.

2.15 Theorem. The set of fixed points of a continuous closure operation is equal
to the range of the function and forms an algebraic closure system.

Proof: The equation              implies that every value of the function is a
fixed point (the converse is obvious). Now, the fixed points of a continuous
functions in general are closed under directed unions, because the function
is continuous.
    Suppose now                   is a monotone closure operation (continu-
ity need not be invoked again). Suppose that                is any collection
of fixed points. By assumption we know



But, since, for each      , we have



we conclude


Therefore,


This establishes closure under intersection.     Q.E.D.

    Now, it is simple matter to show that is a continuous closure opera-
tion if, and only if,              . We can conclude that those operations
form a complete lattice by use of facts about the lattice of continuous func-
tions we are about to define. A more refined argument shows that they
actually form an algebraic lattice, but we do not need to refer to this inter-
esting fact further here.

2.16 Theorem. The function space of all continuous functions from one com-
plete lattice into another again forms a complete lattice under the pointwise
ordering of functions.

                                       9
Proof: We need some notation. Let              be the structure with the
underlying set of all continuous function, where, for                we
define
                                        .
    To show that the partially ordered set                becomes a complete
lattice, we need to define least upper bounds. Let        be a set of continous
functions. We introduce the function


for        . It is necessary first to show that this function is continuous (be-
cause it preserves least upper bounds of directed sets), and then it easily
follows it is the least-upper-bound function in the function-space lattice.
Q.E.D.
    At the time of writing this first draft of this paper, the author is not at
all certain whether there is a simple explaination of what the open subsets
of            are. All the calculations he has ever done in this space have
been carried out using the lattice operations. This remark applies as well
to the following theorem.
2.17 Theorem. The category CLat of complete lattices and continuous functions
is a cartesian closed category.
Proof: (in outline). Basically, we have to show that, given three complete
lattices      and , there is a one-one correspondence between functions
in the two spaces:
                                    and
In fact this one-one correspondence is an isomorphism of lattices (and a
homeomorphism of topological spaces). The nub of the argument is to
check that a function of several variables on complete lattices to complete
lattices is continuous in each of the variables separately if, and only if, it is
continuous in the variables jointly (that is to say, continuous on the product
space). This proves to be a direct calculation involving directed sets and
least upper bounds. This fact needs to be combined with the fact that if a
function is in the space                   , then the function      defined by


for        and           is in                      Q.E.D.

                                      10
   Returning to algebraic lattices, there is a direct argument to show that
the function space of two algebraic lattices is an algebraic lattice by find-
ing a description of the compact elements of the function space. We give
here another argument using algebraic closure operations that relates the
function-space construction to powerset spaces.

2.18 Definition. For any set , let         denote the disjoint union of all the
finite cartesian powers; that is,




We use the notation                for elements of a power       .

2.19 Theorem. The function space                  is a retract of the powerset
space          by a continuous closure operation.

Proof: Given a continuous function                            we associate its
“graph”      by means of the formula



It is easy to check that    is continuous. Moreover there is a continuous
function defined on                 with values in           given by the
formula
                                               .
for                and        . Inasmuch as a set is the directed union of
its finite subsets, a continuous function                    is completely
determined by its action on finite sets. This observation shows why we
have

In the other direction, it is easy to check that for             we have



In this way we find that the composition       is a continuous closure
operation whose range is isomorphic to the complete lattice          .
Q.E.D.

                                      11
   The use of the closure operation in the above theorem shows that the
function space               is always an algebraic lattice. Now any alge-
braic lattice is isomorphic to the range of a continuous closure on a
powerset      , and another such lattice   is isomorphic to the range of a
continuous closure     on another powerset       . We then check that the
function space           is isomorphic to the range of the mapping


which proves to be a continuous closure operation on                 . Hence,
the function space of algebraic lattices is again an algebraic lattice. More-
over, we conclude as an application of the previous theorem that the fol-
lowing holds.

2.20 Theorem. The category ALat of algebraic lattices and continuous functions
is a cartesian closed category.

    Though ALat is a very nice category, and though the function-space
topology can be precisely described in simple and explicit terms, it is still
the case that ALat is quite a “small” (full) subcategory of   , and that it
is virtually completely disjoint with the important subcategory SET. What
we are going to try to achieve is a cartesian closed category naturally
including all these categories and possessing good properties proved by
making use of what we have learned about the category ALat.


3 Equilogical Spaces.
We will give two definitions of the category of equilogical spaces and then
show that the two categories are equivalent. We will then prove that the
category is cartesian closed.

3.1 Definition. The category EQU of equilogical spaces consists of struc-
tures                  , where          is a -space and       is an (arbi-
trary) equivalence relation on the set . The mappings between equilog-
ical spaces are the equivalence classes of continuous mappings between
the topological spaces that preserve the equivalence relation (equivariant
mappings), where the equivalence relation on mappings is defined by
                                     .

                                     12
    We remark that it has to be proved that         actually is an equivalence
relation, but this is an elementary exercise. It also has to be proved that the
equilogical spaces and equivariant maps form a category, but this can also
be safely left to the reader.
    One odd feature of this definition is that the equivalence relation of
an equilogical space may have very little to do with the topology. This
means that in some cases the only equivariant mappings between two
spaces might be the constant maps, or the only automorphisms of a given
space might be the identity—despite a rich underlying topology. Thus,
future investigations may suggest limiting the equivalence relations. But,
for now, the general properties of the category seem to work out well for
arbitrary equivalence relations, so we have not been motivated to make
any restrictions.
3.2 Theorem. The category EQU is complete, co-complete, regular well-powered,
and regular co-well-powered 3.
Proof: The proof proceeds along standard lines making use of the corre-
sponding properties of topological spaces.
    Take products first. The product (of any number) of topological spaces
is a space with a product topology. The product of equivalence relations is
an equivalence relation. The projection mappings are clearly equivariant.
And, if we have a family of (equivalence classes of) equivariant mappings
into the various factor spaces, then (after applying the Axiom of Choice
to pick representatives) we can obtain in the usual way one equivariant
mapping into the product that combines all the separate mappings.
    Next, take equalizers. Suppose                are two (representatives
of) equivariant mappings. Form the set                               . En-
dow this set with the subspace topology and with the restriction of the
equivalence relation . This structure, along with the obvious inclusion
mapping into , is the desired equailizer. Thus, EQU is a complete cate-
gory.
    On to coproducts. The coproduct of topological spaces is just a disjoint
union of the underlying sets with the topology on the union generated by
   3
    The author is indebted to Peter Johnstone for pointing out that, contrary to the asser-
tion made in the first draft of this paper, EQU is not well powered, for there are fairly sim-
ple examples of objects in the category with an unbounded number of non-isomorphic
subobjects.


                                             13
the union of all the topologies. For equivalence relations, we have only
to note that the union of equivalence relations on disjoint sets is indeed
an equivalence relation. The injection mappings from the separate spaces
into the union are obvious, as well as is the lifting property of a family of
mappings from the separate spaces into a given target space.
    Next, we discuss coequalizers. Suppose                    are two (repre-
sentatives of) equivariant mappings. On         we form the least equivalence
relation containing both      and the set of pairs                       . Us-
ing the same topological space as does and this equivalence relation, we
form the equilogical space . There is an obvious equivariant mapping
              . This structure , along with the mapping , is the desired
coequailizer. Thus, EQU is a cocomplete category.
    The properties of being regular well-powered and regular co-well-pow-
ered follow from the corresponding properties of            and the category
of equivalence relations. But, one has to be careful to check that the regular
subobjects are obtained by selecting some equivalence classes and taking
the union of them to form a subspace; likewise, forming a regular quo-
tient is just making the equivalence relation coarser (putting equivalence
classes together). The trouble is that there are subobjects and quotients
which are not formed in this simple way. Q.E.D.

    The proof just given is sketchy in the handling of equivalence classes
of maps, and in the construction of the equalizer and coequalizer it has
to be checked that the structures suggested have the required universal
properties. But, this argument—modulo equivalence classes—is exactly
similar to what is done for the catgory         . We remark that the category
of equivalence relations on sets is included here: a set is just a discrete
topological space (and these form a full subcategory of            ). Of course,
with the aid of the Axiom of Choice, it is quickly shown that the category
of equivalence relations is equivalent to the category of sets (via the obvious
use of quotient sets). However, the category EQU introduced here is not
equivalent to the category        . (For one thing, no topology is being put
on the quotient space           . And, if we are right about the properties
of EQU, this category has a property—cartesian closure—that                does
not share.)
    To investigate EQU further, we introduce a closely connected category.



                                      14
3.3 Definition. The category PEQU of partial equilogical spaces consists of
structures                    , where           is the -topology of an alge-
braic lattice, and where     is a partial equivalence relation, reflexive only
on a subset of     . The mappings between partial equilogical spaces are
the equivalence classes of continuous mappings between the algebraic lat-
tices that preserve the partial equivalence relation, where the equivalence
relation on mappings is defined by

                                      .

These mappings will also be called equivariant.

    If we consider the relation             as being defined between arbi-
trary continuous functions, then equivariant maps for the category PEQU
are the (equivalence classes of) the functions satisfying          , since
that means that the function preserves the underlying equivalence rela-
tion. This remark gives a hint as to how we will define function spaces,
but first we want to check the equivalence of categories.

3.4 Theorem. The categories EQU and PEQU are equivalent.

Proof: The naturally suggested functor from PEQU to EQU is the one that
takes                and restricts the topology to the subspace on the subset
                    . On this subset the equivalence relation is “total”. The
mappings are likewise restricted. Call the functor         (for “restriction”).
Now, if                 is a map of PEQU, then                               is
clearly valid as a map of EQU, and identities and compositions are pre-
served. (Admittedly, there is some equivalence-class fussing that has to
go on here.)
    We note first that the functor is faithful by definition. Then, the func-
tor is full in view of The Extension Theorem (because continuous func-
tions between -spaces can be extended to any algebraic lattices embed-
ding them). Finally, the functor is surjective by virtue of The Embedding
Theorem (and note that the equivalence relation on the -space does not
have to be extended but remains partial). This is enough to show that the
categories are equivalent. Q.E.D.



                                     15
    The idea of partial equivalence relations is very widely employed. (The
author believes he first called general attention to it in the late ’60s after ex-
tracting it from the studies by G. Kreisel on extensional theories of higher-
type functionals in recursion theory.) However, it has been mostly used
recently in the context of giving types to (quotients of) subsets of a uni-
versal model of some sort. Allowing partial equivalence relations over a
large category (such as algebraic lattices) is possibly a new idea. But, cer-
tainly, many familiar proofs get reused in the new context. The following
theorem is an example of this reuse.

3.5 Theorem. The category EQU is cartesian closed.

Proof: In view of the previous theorem, we will show that PEQU is carte-
sian closed. Given structures and in PEQU we define the structure
         so that

  (i)          is the set of continuous functions;
 (ii)        is the -topology on this algebraic lattice;
 (iii)       is the partial equivalence defined previously.

As in the argument for complete lattices, we have to show that, given three
structures in PEQU, say,       and , there is a one-one correspondence
between functions in in the two spaces:

                                    and
As we know, there is a particular one-one correspondence that is an iso-
morphism of the underlying algebraic lattices (and a homeomorphism of
topological spaces). It only remains to show that the isomorphism pre-
serves the partial equivalence relation on the compound space. This is a
“self-proving” theorem, in the sense that once the question is stated it is
just a matter of unpacking the definitions to finish it off. Q.E.D.


4 Some Subcategories.
We have already remarked that SET is embedded as a full and faithful sub-
category of EQU, and the same goes for    . Every -space is given the

                                       16
identity relation as its equivalence relation, and this produces the desired
embedding into EQU. We have to be careful on how these embeddings are
interpreted, however. They certainly preserve products and coproducts
(and maybe even all limits and colimits), but they do not preserve func-
tion spaces. For SET, the classical theorem of Cantor tells us that function
spaces (starting with a denumerable set such as IN, for example, and iter-
ating) become very large in cardinality. This is not so in EQU. As regards
       , one can define what it means for given spaces to have an exponen-
tial, and the embedding does preserve exponentials that exist.

4.1 Theorem. For every infinite set , the space (the algebraic lattice) of all con-
tinuous functions                 is a retract of      by means of a continuous
closure operation. The same is true of the product space             .

Proof: We refer back to Theorem 2.19, which tells us that
is such a retract of         . But the infinite set is—by virtue of the
Axiom of Choice—in a one-one correspondence with the set         . Hence,
the lattices    and           are isomorphic. For the product space, we
remark that            is isomorphic to            , and so isomorphic to
    as well. Q.E.D.

4.2 Theorem. Given an infinite set , the category of partial equivalence rela-
tions on   is a sub-cartesian-closed full subcategory of PEQU.

Proof: The idea is that in forming products and function spaces we always
embed the necessary algebraic lattices as retracts of     , and we never
have to go outside this space. Q.E.D.

    Thus, starting with IN, the higher-type spaces IN      IN, IN   IN     IN,
  IN    IN    IN      IN, and so on, are all represented via equivalence rela-
tions on subspaces of one space, IN, of the cardinality of the continuum.
    Even better, if is a -space with a countable basis                 for its
topology, then the mapping                      shows that can be regarded
as a subspace of       , which is isomorphic to IN, if is infinite, and to a
subspace, otherwise. Therefore, the countably based spaces in EQU form a
sub-cartesian-closed full subcategory equivalent to a small category. And
the same can be said of spaces where the topology has a bound in cardi-
nality on the size of a basis. The whole category EQU is thus stratified by

                                       17
the cardinalities of the bases for the topologies. Note, too, that the finite
spaces in EQU form an interesting sub-cartesian-closed full subcategory,
which is probably rather different from just finite -spaces.
   The closed subspaces of algebraic lattices (under the -topology) have
been much studied. A closed subset of such a lattice is a set that is down-
ward-closed (under the partial ordering) and additionally closed under
the formation of least upper bounds of directed subsets. As partially or-
dered sets, they can also be characterized as algebraic, bounded-complete,
directed-closed posets. It is well known that they form a cartesian closed
category, where the maps in the category are continuous functions be-
tween closed subsets. The -topology also works for them, and they are
also a full subcategory of the -spaces. The category is often called BCPO.

4.3 Theorem. The category BCPO can be regarded as a sub-cartesian-closed full
subcategory of EQU; i.e., there is a full and faithful functor from BCPO to EQU
which preserves the ccc-structure.

Proof: Working in PEQU we can clearly construe the category as being the
algebraic lattices with a partial identity relation over a closed subset. If
and are such structures, and if         and     are the corresponding closed
subsets, then the function-space construction we are looking at takes all
continuous functions between the algebraic lattices (which form an alge-
braic lattice), and puts a partial equivalence relation on the functions map-
ping      into    according to whether they restrict down to the same func-
tion on . This is a perfectly fine structure in PEQU, but it is not directly
seen to be in the subcategory BCPO. We can call this structure               in
PEQU, however.
    In BCPO, the function space is just the set of continuous functions from
    into     with the pointwise partial ordering. This space, which we can
call temporarily             , proves to be in BCPO. The -topology has as
a subbase for the open sets the sets of continuous functions of the form



where is a compact element of , and is a compact element of . The
poset           can be made into an algebraic lattice just by adding a top
element, and so we can put ourselves into the image of BCPO in PEQU.


                                      18
What we have to show is that the two functions spaces are isomorphic in
PEQU.
    Now, if is in            , we map it to the restriction      . By definition
equivalent functions in              go into equal functions. Conversely, if
is a function in              , then we extend it to a continuous function
on all of the lattice part of by setting the values to the top element of
outside the closed subset . To see that                 is continuous, we take
compact elements of and of , and we note that
                                               or
Hence, the inverse image of a subbasic open subset of        is either the
whole space or a subbasic open subset of            . We have continuity,
and the two mappings are clearly inverse to one another in PEQU. This
establishes isomorphism. Q.E.D.


5 Acknowledgments and Questions.
The idea that there might be a cartesian closed category like EQU occurred
to the author at the end of the Fall Semester 1996 while lecturing to a post-
graduate class on Domain Theory. He would like to thank that class for
being such a lively one and for asking so many questions4 . Without the
task of having to explain the many details and trying to make the motiva-
tion for the mathematical concepts convincing—in which he only partly
succeeded—he would never have had the stimulation to pursue this di-
rection. The idea in fact came up in the context of polymorphism, which
brings us to our first question.

Question 1. Our arguments above show that the (small) category of all
spaces in PEQU with the same underlying space          over an infinite set
is cartesian closed. But, since these are just partial equivalence relations
on a fixed set, they also form a lattice, where the greatest lower bounds
are intersections of partial equivalence relations. By using a retraction of
    onto            , we make      into a model for the untyped -calculus
   4
    The author would be grateful to receive any further answers, counterexamples, com-
ments or objections by e-mail. Last year various detailed comments from Mike Barr, Peter
Johnstone, Peter Freyd, Pino Rosolini, and Martin Escardo were most helpful.


                                          19
which can be used to give the cartesian structure to the category. How
good a model for polymorphism are the partial equivalence relations as
types?
    Comments. Actually, a very good model is obtained for polymorphism.
This can be seen by looking at the construction of the realizability topos
over     and properties of “modest sets”, which have been studied by a
large number of authors over that last 15 years. The author’s research
group5 is going to study this interpretation in particular detail for the case
  IN.

Question 2. Another popular category for domain theory is the category
of SFP objects or the more general category of bifinite domains. These are
certain inverse limits of finite posets. Since EQU is so complete, will these
categories turn out to be sub-cartesian-closed full subcategories of EQU as
well? What about other categories of domains (say, many of those men-
tioned in the “Domain Theory” survey of Abramsky and Jung)?
    Comments. We have not had time to look into the various categories in
detail, but it still seems very likely that these will be well behaved subcat-
egories. So, the advantage we hope to find is being to to put them all into
one category.

Question 3. Can the powerset spaces,        with the identity equivalence,
be defined in EQU by a condition expressed entirely in category-theoretical
terms? What about the subcategories of algebraic lattices and of continu-
ous lattices? What about BCPO? What about SET? What about            ?
   Comments. Andrej Bauer has checked that the projective objects of EQU
are just those isomorphic to sets, and the regular projectives are the iso-
morphs of -spaces. There are indeed going to be characterizations of
those other subcategories, but just which are going to be “memorable”
needs further study.

Question 4. Which functors have fixed points? (These are solutions to
   5
     Progress on our project can be checked on the WWW at the following site:
                                   . We have also recorded in the thesis proposals of
Bauer, Birkedal, and Hughes many more questions for future work than can be explained
in the present document.



                                         20
“domain equations”.) Which functors have initial or final algebras?
   Comments. This question can be vexing. We know many examples and
we know sufficient conditions on functors. We know                  has
many solutions (in known subcategories). But it seems quite difficult to
find all solutions. See the next question.

Question 5. Can Peter Freyd’s theory of fixed points of functors of mixed
variance be applied to EQU? In particular, when is a structure in EQU
with          a (special kind of?) retract of , can this space always be
embedded in a space                ?

Question 6. Which structures in EQU satisfy the fixed-point property
(fpp) for all self-maps? Or is it better to look at the structures all of whose
powers satisfy the fixed-point property (the generalized fpp)? The author
thought he had a proof once that they would form a cartesian closed full
subcategory. Do they? How good is this subcategory for domain theory?
   Comments. Yes, we checked this. The spaces in EQU satisfying the gen-
eralized fpp not only form a cartesian closed subcategory, but they are (by
definition) an exponential ideal. The category of Scott domains (closed
subspaces of algebraic lattices) and continuous Scott domains (closed sub-
spaces of continuous lattices) also form exponential ideals. Satisfying the
generalized fpp is definitely more general, however; but, it seems hard to
say exactly how much more general.

Question 7. Many of the proofs indicated in the previous sections required
the Axiom of Choice. Can EQU be defined in any topos so as to have good
properties? Does the construction give an interesting computability theory
in the effective topos?
    Comments. We have not looked at EQU in toposes other than SET.
But, the realizability interpretion over IN leads to finding connections be-
tween three toposes which include very satisfactory information on com-
putability. We feel we can thus combine theories of continuity over stan-
dard (countably based) spaces with a theory of computability in a common
logic giving a basis for type theory and topos logic6 .
   6
   See the WWW site mentioned earlier for our detailed plans and progress reports. The
papers cited there (availble by ftp) also have many references to other relevant work.


                                         21
Question 8. The real numbers naturally form a space IR in EQU. Is the
space IR      IR in EQU a topological space (say, the continuous func-
tion space with the compact-open topology)? And how can we describe
higher-type spaces such as IR     IR    IR, and so on? What is the connec-
tion to the new theory of “total functions” recently put foward by Ulrich
Berger? Is the (definite) Riemann integral

                               IR   IR     IR    IR     IR

a map in EQU?
   Comments. Andrej Bauer has proved that, in view of known theorems
on exponentials in         , IR     IR in EQU is indeed topological: the
space of continuous real functions with the so-called compact-open topol-
ogy. It is much harder to say what IR    IR    IR is, because it is not topo-
logical. The work of Abbas Edalat can be invoked to settle positively the
question about integration. Moreover, integration is a computable map-
ping. Bauer has also clarified the connections with the work of Berger7.




   7
  See the discussions of the concepts in the thesis proposal of Bauer available on our
WWW site.


                                         22
