Journal of Philosophy, Inc.



On Engendering an Illusion of Understanding
Author(s): Dana Scott
Reviewed work(s):
Source: The Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 68, No. 21, Sixty-Eighth Annual Meeting of the
American Philosophical Association Eastern Division (Nov. 4, 1971), pp. 787-807
Published by: Journal of Philosophy, Inc.
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2024952 .
Accessed: 08/02/2013 08:14

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.




                Journal of Philosophy, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Journal
                of Philosophy.




http://www.jstor.org




                                      This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                                           All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
           ON ENGENDERING AN ILLUSION                   OF UNDERSTANDING                    787

by him-or by me. On this moderateview, (i)-(iii) would record
bodily,muscular,and neuralelementsof my pushingmy footdown-
wards-not subcutaneouscarryings-on.
   I've sketcheda language game wherewe singleout various sorts
ofeventcomponentsin behavior.It differs    fromthegame in whichwe
isolate each act token of a given kind and decide whethernon-
synonymousdefinitedescriptionsor reportsmarka givenact token.
That is wheremultipliershould contendwithradical and moderate
unifiers.A third,comparativelytrivialgame is demarcatinghomoge-
neousspatial and temporalsegmentsofan act token.Goldmanseems
engaged in yet a fourthenterprise-bothinterestingand legitimate:
cataloguingpropertiesexemplifiedduringsome phase of an agent's
career. Evidentlypropertiesare neitheringredientsnor segmentsof
action. But perhaps Goldman imagines that individuatingthem
amounts to individuatingthe deeds in whichtheyare manifested.
  As for Davidson, how should a moderate unifierpersuade him
that our acts compriseanythingmore than bodily motions? Davis
(IA) and Thomson (TK) have marshalled remindersagainst his
doctrinethat effectsare not to be includedin what we do. I throw
in the metaphysico-conceptual  argumentfromsection ii. Suppose
objects and the eventstheyfigurein are complementary(Davidson,
IE 226-227; cf. Goldman, 773). By analogy, aren't bodilymotions,
movingour bodies, and therebyaffectingthingsabout us, equally
essential to our notionsof what it is to act and to be responsible?
                                                                        IRVING   THALBERG
Universityof Illinois at Chicago Circle


 ON ENGENDERING AN ILLUSION OF UNDERSTANDING
M                                Quine.Thoughhehimself
         Y titleechoesa phrasefrom                   may
          not have set thestage formanyofthestillcurrentdebates
          on the philosophyof logic, he certainlyhas illuminated
it withhis searchingcriticismand his tirelessdemands forrigorand
clarity.The complete quotation fromQuine is a familiarone and
providesa convenientcurtainraiserforthis symposium:
  * To be presentedin a jointAPA-ASL symposiumon Entailment,December27,
1971.Co-symposiasts willbe R. K. Meyerand H. P. Grice;forProfessor Meyer's
paper,see thisJOURNAL, thisissue,pp. 808-818; ProfessorGrice'spaperis not
availableat thistime.
  An NSF grantpartiallysupportedworkon this paper. PrincetonUniversity
has providedfundswhichmakeit possibleto publishit at its presentlength.The
initialideasevolvedduringa graduateseminarconductedat Princetonin thefall
of1970.The authorwishesto thankJavierArratfand PhilipHansenforsugges-
tionsand forhelpin checkingvariousreferencesand details.




                    This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                         All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
788                 THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY


     Lewisfoundedmodernmodallogic,but Russellprovokedhimto
  it. For whereasthereis muchto be said forthematerialconditional
                          thereis nothingto be said forit as a version
  as a versionof 'if-then',
  of'implies';and Russellcalledit implication, thusapparently  leaving
  no place openforgenuinedeductiveconnections      betweensentences.
  Lewis movedto save the connections.     But his way was not,as one
  could have wished,to sortout Russell'sconfusion    of 'implies'with
  'if-then'.Instead,preserving  thatconfusion, he propoundeda strict
  conditionaland calledit implication.
     It is logicallypossibleto like modal logicwithoutconfusing    use
  and mention.You couldlikeit because,apparentlyat least,you can
  quantifyinto a modal contextby a quantifier      outsidethe modal
  context,whereasyou obviouslycannotcoherently        quantifyinto a
  mentionedsentencefromoutsidethe mentionof it. Still,man is a
  sense-making   animal,and as such he deriveslittlecomfortfrom
  quantifying  into modal contextsthat he does not thinkhe under-
  stands.On thisscore,confusion     of use and mentionseemsto have
  morethangeneticsignificance    formodallogic.It seemsto be also a
  sustainingforce,engendering   an illusionof understanding.1
   In the ten years since these words were writtenthe thrustsof
certain of Quine's points may have slightlydulled. Some would
claim now a coherentunderstandingofmodal contextsin the lightof
the extensivework on possible-worldsemantics.And we ought to
take them seriously,forthey have done something     coherent.There
remains a naggingdoubt in my mind, however,that the problem
solved by the use of the possible-worldsapproach is not quite the
original problem of modal logic, only an analogous one sharing
certain formalsimilarities.In a differentdirectionthere are now
those who would rashlyencourageus to quantifydirectlyinto quo-
tation contextswith the (to me, highlydubious) assistance of sub-
stitutionalquantification.But that scheme-and the allure it pres-
entlyholds forQuine-is a subject foranothersymposium.
   There remain Quine's pithy complaintsabout the use/mention,
'if-then'/'implies'confusions,which are most accurately aimed at
Russell and Lewis. I have no desire to defendconfusion,even from
good sources; but I would like to reopendiscussionon the meritsof
strictimplication,or betteron the programthat Lewis envisaged.
My claim is goingto be that someprogramof formalizinga "logical
implication" can be presentedin a nonconfusedmanner arriving
eventuallyat certainof Lewis's systems.The path is different  from
Lewis's, but the resultsseem quite satisfactory;and the method-at
least to me-engenders a comfortableillusion.As a consequence of
                     Marcus,"in W. V. Quine,TheWaysofParadoxand Other
  1 "Replyto Professor
Essays (New York: RandomHouse,1966),p. 175.




                   This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                        All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
           ON ENGENDERING AN ILLUSION                   OF UNDERSTANDING     789

the approach we will even findsomethinggood to say about the
material conditional,not functioningas 'implies', but used as a
parallel to.

Justhow confusedwas Russell? In some respectsit seems the answer
does have to be: very.In view of his lack of sensitivityto the needs
and details offormalgrammar,it is hard to denyGodel's sharpjudg-
ment2that thePrincipia "presentsin thisrespecta considerablestep
backwards as comparedwith Frege." But we should recall that at
the time of the writingof the Principia the distinctionbetweenthe
logical and semanticalparadoxeshad yet to be made, that theobject
language/metalanguageboundaryhad not yet been sharplydrawn,
and, above all, Godel's startlingresults were some twentyyears
away.
   Besides thishistoricalsituation,the line betweenuse and mention
                                   line to toe. In a givensentenceyou
is in any case a devilishlydifficult
can hardlysee the wordsforthe senses. Anyonewho has ever tried
to proofreada manuscriptknowsthe problemall too well. A wordis
barelyencounteredbeforewe beginto pull out a distractingtangleof
connections,associations,and images.The echo chamberofthemind
is farnoisierthan that of any electronicrock-and-roll    band. But I do
not mean to give excuses.
   More soberly, we can point out that the slow developmentof
algebra in Westernthoughthelped in its own way to create the con-
fusion between symbols and their denotations. And the advance
fromBoole to Whitehead was not all that great in rigor.As Quine
points out in his interestingessay on Whitehead,3therewas a very
seriousmuddle in the treatmentof the meaningof equations in the
earlierwork, UniversalAlgebra,whichshowsup again in the curious
use of the symbols'w' and 'j' in the sectionsof that book on logical
algebra. It seemsreasonableto me that theseingrainedhabitswould
carry over to the Principia. It was not Russell's contributionto
algebra that excitedWhiteheadto collaboration;ratherit was surely
his use of the concepts of quantification,description,propositional
functions,and relationsthat opened up the vision of a logical recon-
structionof mathematics,therebycompletingtheworkof Frege and
Peano. This seemsclear fromtheadvanced state of Russell's thought
in The Principlesof Mathematics.
  2 "Russell's MathematicalLogic," in P. A. Schilpp,ed., The
                                                             Philosophyof
BertrandRussell(New York: Harper& Row, 1963),p. 126.
  8 "Whiteheadand the Rise of ModernLogic,"in Quine,Selected  LogicPapers
(New York: RandomHouse, 1966),pp. 9 ff.




                    This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                         All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
790                   THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY


  But getting back to use and mention,let us examine a typical
passage fromthe Principia:
    The ImplicativeFunctionis a propositionalfunctionwith two
  arguments   p and q, and is the proposition   thateithernot-por q is
  true,thatis, it is the proposition- p v q. Thus if p is true,- p is
  false,and accordinglythe only alternativeleftby the proposition
    p v q is thatq is true.In otherwordsifp and - p v q are bothtrue,
  thenq is true.In thissensetheproposition     - p v q willbe quoted as
  statingthat p impliesq. The idea containedin this propositional
  functionis so importanthat it requiresa symbolismwhichwith
  directsimplicityrepresents    the propositionas connecting    p and q
  withoutheintervention     of - p. But "implies"as usedhereexpresses
  nothingelse thanthe connection      betweenp and q also expressedby
  the disjunction"not-por q." The symbolemployedfor"p implies
  q," i.e.,for"- p v q," is p : q." This symbolmayalso be read "ifp,
  thenq." The associationofimplication       withthe use of an apparent
  variableproducesan extensioncalled "formalimplication."This is
  explainedlater: it is an idea derivativefrom"implication"as here
  defined.Whenit is necessaryexplicitly     todiscriminate"implication"
  from"formalimplication,"     it is called "materialimplication."Thus
  "materialimplication"is simply"implication"as heredefined.The
  processof inference,  whichin commonusageis oftenconfusedwith
  implication, is explainedimmediately.4
Or again we have:
    The simplestexampleoftheformation     ofa morecomplexfunction
  of propositions by the use of thesefourfundamental   formsis fur-
  nishedby "equivalence."Two propositions     p and q are said to be
  "equivalent"whenp impliesq and q impliesp. This relationbetween
  p and q is denotedby "p q." Thus "p q" standsfor"(p D q)
  * (q D p)." It is easily seen that two propositionsare equivalent
  when,and onlywhen,theyare bothtrueor are bothfalse. Equiva-
  lencerisesin thescaleofimportance   whenwe cometo "formalimpli-
  cation"and thusto "formalequivalence."It mustnot be supposed
  thattwopropositions   whichare equivalentare in anysenseidentical
  or evenremotely   concernedwiththesame topic (loc.cit.).
  Talk like this is so easy; I have to admit I do it all the time,
thoughI thinkI knowbetter.Even Reichenbachhas been knownto
talk this way.5
  How does Lewis fare?Not muchbetter,I am afraid.Considerthis
passage from SymbolicLogic,noting that these quotations from
  4PrincipiaMathematica   (Cambridge:University Press,reprinted1960; here-
aftercalledPM), vol. 1, p. 7.
                 "BertrandRussell'sLogic,"in Schilpp,op. cit.,pp. 23-54; I refer
  5 In hisarticle,
hereto theparagraphat thebottomofp. 27.




                      This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                           All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
            ON ENGENDERING AN ILLUSION                   OF UNDERSTANDING     79I


various authors are being presented both for their formand for their
content:
  This translation [from the Boole-Schroder Algebra to the Two-
  valued Algebra] will serve two purposes: first,it will set off the
  propositionalinterpretationof principleswhich are common to the
  two systems from their interpretationfor classes. And second, it
  will introducethe reader to the symbolismmost used to-day forthe
  calculus of propositions. These changes of symbolism include the
  following:
  (1) Instead of a, b, c, etc., we shall use p, q ,r, etc., forpropositions.
  (2) Instead of - p, we shall write ' p forthe contradictoryof p, or
  "p is false."
  (3) Instead of p c q, we shall writep n q for "If p is true, then q is
  true" or "p implies q."
  (4) Instead of p + q, we shall write p v q for "At least one of the
  two, p and q, is true" or "Either p or q."
  (5) Instead of p = q, we shall writep       q for"p and q are both true
  or both false" or "p is equivalent to q." However, we shall continue
  to use the symbol = for purely notational equivalences, such as
  p = 1, and forindicating that two expressionsare to have the same
  meaning,by definition.6
The translation from inclusion to implication is misleading enough,
but the remarks about equality are just incoherent. Scarcely more
than a page later we find:
    A propositionp is eitheralways true or always false; eitherp = 1
  or p = 0. The symbolism- p means "p is false"; so does p = 0.
  Hence these two are here interchangeable. Similarly p and p = 1
              ways of expressing"p is true," and are interchangeable.
  are different
  We can, then,whereverwe choose, write- p forp = 0, in a theorem,
  and p for p = 1; the meaning of the theorem will be unaffected.
  Thus the expressionsp = 0 and p = 1 can be eliminated. However,
  we shall sometimeswritea principlein both ways, in order that the
  derivationof the simplerformmay be clear (82).
Have I missed the point? I see nothing to do with "notational
equivalences" here.
   In the Principia Russell and Whitehead proceededfrom the propo-
sitional calculus to class algebra; Lewis and Langford in Symbolic
Logic returned to the earlier sequence of presentation, I suppose for
pedagogical and historical reasons. There is something to be said,
however, for the explanation of class algebra through propositional
functions,whereby a separation between the relation of inclusion and
 6 C. I. Lewisand C. H. Langford,Symbolic Logic (New York: Century,1932;
Doverreprint,              calledSL), p. 80.
              1959,hereafter




                     This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                          All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
792                  THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY


a certainBoolean operation(definedby the polynomial'- p + q') is
quite necessary.But when the Boolean algebra is the algebra of the
two truth values, then the distinctionvanishes, since now every
Boolean operationis in facta relation.Even equivalenceand equality
are the same forthe truth-valuealgebra. Maybe thisis wherepart
of theconfusionsets in; especiallyifno distinctionis drawnbetween
the two-elementclass algebra and the two-elementtruth-value
algebra.
  The otherside of the difficulty, however,revolvesabout the ideas
of conditional,implication,and inference.NorbertWienertriedonce
to defendRussell against Lewis on the basis of Russell's notionof
formalimplication7(a universallyquantifiedmaterial conditional).
There is a long passage in the Principia on this idea which Russell
consideredvery important (20f.). It looks like quicksand to me,
however,particularlysince Russell bringsknowledgeinto the dis-
cussion early on. In any case, in a conditionalsuch as:
                                90(x,y).=D/.(x,y)
how are we supposed to tell whetherquantificationon 'x', or on
or on both makes this "formal"? Russell is confoundingthe propo-
sitionalfunctionwithits value-in the way so commonto mathema-
ticians withtheiruse of such expressionsas 'f(x)'-as well as mixing
up use and mention.It does not seem to me that thereis any hope
forthe idea of formalimplicationwithoutbringingin consideration
of the metalanguageand propertiesof the formalprovabilityof sen-
tences.But it is amusingto note that,fromthe possible-worlds   point
of view, universallyquantifiedconditionalswould behave just like
strictimplicationsin the systemS5 of Lewis.
   How did Lewis come to favorstrictimplication?He firstlistedall
the peculiar propertiesof the material conditional,and we do not
need to review here these so-called "paradoxes" today. Then he
began the eliminationof the undesirabletautologieswith the aid of
the conceptof an unanalyzedpropositionleadingto the derivationof
"a calculus of propositionsfromsymbolicpostulates,by the logistic
method" (SL, 122). You see, he wanted 'p impliesq' to mean 'q is de-
ducible fromp', but he wanted to use 'p' and 'q' in the familiarway
as propositionalvariables. He probably did not even know about
meta- or sentencevariables. (And he did not seem to want to learn
about themeither,to judge fromQuine's remarks.)Since his propo-
sitionswereto be unanalyzed,his calculus would "compriseonlythe
mostgeneralprinciplesof deductiveinference"(loc. cit.) That is, the
                              thisJOURNAL,xiii, 24 (Nov. 13,1916):656-662.
  7 "Mr. Lewisand Implication,"




                    This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                         All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
          ON ENGENDERING AN ILLUSION                   OF UNDERSTANDING     793

resultswould "not depend upon the analysis of the propositionsin
question" (loc. cit.), in the way that the highlyextensionalview
wherebythevalue ofa propositionis a truthvalue no doubt leads to.
  Strictimplicationitselfis definedin termsof possibility:
  11.02                        p - q. =. -              j(p-q)
but all the axiomsare given in termsof '-i'. Lewis says:
                                                             will
    The propertiesof this relation,and its precisesignificance,
  becomeclearerwiththe development   of the system,particularlyin
  Section4 (SL, 124).
I pass over what he says about logicalequivalence;thisis the "logistic
method" indeed! I do not mean to be too unkind, however; the
systemwithits axioms,rulesof inference,and sequence of theorems
is very nicely set out, and it is fun to do. Come to think of it,
though,that may just be one of the dangersof the formalapproach
to thought:it is too easy to be tidyand elegantwithouthavingsuffi-
cient justificationforthe particularsystematization.
   When we look at the promisedSection 4, we find at last a dis-
cussion of the modal functiondenoted by 'KOp'and read "p is possi-
ble" or "p is self-consistent."And aftera longsequence of theorems
strictimplicationis foundto be equivalent to the necessarymaterial
conditional(18.7). But is anythingclearernow besides these formal
dependencies?Lewis agrees that "the words 'possible,' 'impossible',
and 'necessary' are highly ambiguous in ordinary discourse"
(SL, 160). But he continues,"The meaninghere assignedto op is
a wide meaning of 'possibility'-namely, logical conceivabilityor
the absence of self-contradiction"(160/1). Such colloquial render-
ings are often helpfulin followingthe formaldevelopment,but I
cannotsee how such remarkscan servein place of a seriousjustifica-
tion. In this circumstancewe are led to ask whethertherecould be
any justificationat all for such a confused concept as strict
implication.
                                             II
It was veryreasonableofLewis to ask forthemostgeneralprinciples
of deductiveinference,even if we come to judge him as not having
supplied them himself.Fortunatelya very good answer has been
found subsequently: namely, by Gentzen. Unfortunately,in my
opinion,both because of the aims of Gentzen's own workand in the
lightoflaterapplications,the Gentzensystemshave been verymuch
orientedtoward proof-theoretic   analyses-especially the problems
of establishingthe so-calledcut-eliminationtheorem. For me thiswas
misleading.It took me a long time to realize that cut is notelimina-




                   This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                        All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
794                 THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY


ble-except in veryspecial circumstances.This is not to say that cut
eliminationis uninteresting  or unimportant,but theredoes seem to
be a simpleand basic point to make with the aid of Gentzen's idea
whichmay not be so generallyappreciated.
   Let us side withLewis in askingfora calculusofunanalyzedpropo-
sitions,but let us at the same time tryto be clearerabout what we
are doing. Maybe the word 'proposition' is worn out from long
misuse.Can we finda betterone? I have no brilliantsuggestion,but
I would like to propose 'statement'. For reasons that will become
apparentin a moment,we shall see that 'sentence'willnot do. I want
instead to use 'statement' in a way that is intermediate   between
'proposition'and 'sentence'.The latteris too syntactical;the former
carriesaround too heavy a load of metaphysicalbaggage. The choice
of 'statement' is not perfect,either,for it would seem to harbor
withinits meaningsome sense of the actionof statingsomething,a
sense I do not intend. Possibly 'potential statement' would be
closerto my intention,but that phrase is clumsy.So let me request
your good will for the moment in using 'statement' in a rather
neutralmanner.
   For the sake of systematization,let us suppose that we are con-
sideringa "language" forwhichthe relevantstatementsforma set
S. Now the elementsA E S are but potentialstatements,and some-
thingactive has to be done to assert one of them.This is embodied
in the notionof assertionsymbolizedby the sign' '. Thus, to say
                                           [ A
is to assert the truthof A, usage taken over fromFrege and popu-
larized by the Principia. As everyoneknows,Gentzen,buildingon
earlier work of Hertz, extended the notion to that of conditional
assertion.Thus we can say:
                                A fB
or
                        Ao,A,j. . .,A,_
                                     n-  1

or even
                  Ao,Aj1,... ,An_j F Bo,BI,. .. jBm-1
in the styleof Gentzen's well-knowncalculus of sequents.8
  Are we makingany sense? Yes, having firstspecifiedthe set 8 of
statements,we next specify F. What is this F1?It is a relation,the
relationof conditionalassertion; specificallyit is a binaryrelation
betweenfinitesetsof statements.This last conventionis but a con-
                                         W. E. Szabo, ed. (Amsterdam:
                                  Gentzen,
                   Papers ofGerhard
 8 Cf. The Collected

North-Holland,1969).




                   This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                        All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
          ON ENGENDERING AN ILLUSION                  OF UNDERSTANDING     795

venienceto make the listingof thepropertiesof F particularlyeasy.
Thus when we write:
                Ao,A ,. . .,Ai              F B0,Bj,.. .,Bml
we reallymean to write:
              {Ao,A1,. ..,A n1}              F {BOBl, . .Bmi1}
as a relationshipbetweensets. If we like,we could insistthat F is a
relationbetweenfinitesequencesof statements;but that refinement
is irrelevantforthe presentdiscussion.
   What could this relation F be? What relationis it? The answer
dependson manyfactors:it dependson thenatureoftheelementsof
S; it depends on what we want to do with them.But Lewis did not
want us to analyze the elementsof 8, and we shall not. We do, how-
ever, allow ourselves to say that statementscan be eithertrueor
false, and in various ways. That does not implyany analysis,but it
is part ofour understandingofwhat it is that "propositions"convey.
They may also convey other information,and we can conceive of
other "languages" where no truthvalue at all is "embedded" in a
proposition.Such considerationswill lead to other relations,how-
ever; relationsdifferent fromthe conditionalassertionof classical
logic. Justhow different, though,is a question that must be investi-
gated; in certain instances the differenceis not very extreme-at
least formany essentialproperties.
   Let us thenagree that truthvalues are importantand that trutlh
values can be assigned to statements-perhaps in various ways. To
make this idea precise,we can introducethe concept of a valuation
as a functionfromstatementsto truthvalues. Let 1 be the truth
value trueand let 0 be the truthvalue false. Mathematicallyspeak-
ing, then,a valuation is a function
                                 v: 8 -* {0,1}
For each A e 8, we have v(A) as the truthvalue of A as assigned to
A by the functionv. Differentways of making assignmentscorre-
spond to different  functions.One way implies that each statement
has a unique truthvalue; hence,our use of functions.All of this is
terriblyfamiliar,and it was meantto be. I am onlytryingto empha-
size the properlevel of abstractionto be able to meaningfullydiscuss
Lewis's program.
   What then about F ? How does this relationinvolve valuations?
In the firstplace, dependingon our intentions,not all valuations are
reasonable. Though it may not always be immediately apparent
what theyare, we can postulatea set V ofintendedvaluationsappro-




                  This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                       All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
796                 THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY


priate to our understandingof the statementsin S. (Careful!Under-
standingdoes not imply knowledge.Let us keep knowledgeout of
this discussion.) It is in terms of V that F becomes completely
definite,forwe can now definefortwo finitesubsets a, (3 C 3:
                                       0,F63
to mean that everyvaluation v e V makingall statementsin a true,
makes at leastone statementin 63truealso. That is, underthecondi-
tionof truthforall A e a, the truthof at least one B e 63follows.It is
only a conditionalassertion.Note that the '63'-partis taken as a set,
to allow forfulltrue-falseduality.For we can also say that at F 63
if and only if everyvaluation in 'U makingall statementsin 63false
makes at least one statementin a,false also.
   Having made moreprecisetheimportof F, whatofits properties?
They are easy to state and easy to appreciate:
(Reflexivity)              a F 63if a 63#
(Monotonicity)                    a, a            3,

(Transitivity)                       a, F B,e
                                     a,B F e

In the above, the scriptlettersrangeover finitesubsetsof 8 and the
italic capitals over the elementsof S. I have written'(t, a" as short
forIa'v a", and'a,B' as shortfor'at {B}'.
  We can call theselaws '(R)', '(M)', and '(T)' forshort.What is the
status of these laws? They are all statementsof the metalanguage,
countingthe statementsin 8 as being those of the objectlanguage.
Besides this,grantingthe definitionof F in termsof 'U,theyare all
true.I have written(M) and (T) as inference     rules,but that is just
a shorthandforthe materialconditionalfromthe conjunctionof the
premisesto the conclusion.A persondoes not have to know about
the theoryof materialconditionalsto be able in the metalanguage
   to apply thesetwo specificconditionalsin an argumentconcerning
the relation F. Rule (T) is the famouscutrule,and, farfrombeing
mysterious,it is just a verycharacteristicand valid propertyof con-
ditional assertion.
  Are thereothervalid rules? Yes, of course. For example:
                                    A FB
                                    B FC
                                    C FD
                                    A FD,E




                   This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                        All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
           ON ENGENDERING AN ILLUSION                        OF UNDERSTANDING   797

is clearlyvalid; forifA is made true,thenin turnso are B, C, and D.
But obviously it can be provedon the basis of (R), (M), and (T).
We are asking the metametaquestion       whetherthere are any prop-
ertiesof a relationof conditionalassertionthat are not impliedby
(R), (M), and (T). In other words, the question is whetherthese
threelaws providean adequate axiomatizationin the metalanguage
of the simplepropertiesof conditionalassertion.If so, we then have
what seems to me to be a solutionto a big part ofLewis's programof
settingup-as a metalinguisticactivity-a generaltheoryof deduc-
tive inference.
   The essentialsof the argumentforthe completenessof the rules
are well known; I give only the briefestsummary.In a completely
abstract settingwe suppose we have a set 3 and a relation F be-
tween finitesubsets of 3 whichis assumed to satisfy(R), (M), and
(T). We ask: could such a relation F have come froma set of valu-
ations? The answeris yes,and we can even findthe largestsuch set
of valuations. Given -, we say that a valuation v is consistent  with
 F (in symbols:  v  e (F) if and only if whenever a  F 63and v makes
all statementsin a true,it makes some statementin 63truealso. One
thenprovesalong standardlinesthat thegivenrelation F couldhave
been definedin termsof VF as the set of intendedvaluations. One
has to prove that if a F 63does not hold, then thereis a valuation
v e F making all of a trueand all of 63false. In case the set 3 is
countable,the argumentis a simple stepwise constructionof v. In
case 3 is uncountable(ifone allows such abstractions),thenthe proof
requires a "maximum" argumentestablished with the aid of the
axiomofchoice.When I said beforethatcut cannot be "eliminated",
I meant that in this proofwe cannot leave offthe assumptionthat
 F satisfies(T).
   Is such a level of abstractionand sophisticationreally necessary
fordiscussingsuch simplenotions?Yes, I assert,it is-if one wants
a generaltheory.And we do want the generality.For one reason we
are enabled to argue about the connectionbetween F and 3 once
and forall. The point is that it covers all the cases. Thus the set 3
could be construedin one instance as comprisingthe sentencesof a
formallanguage,so that the elementsof 3 are syntactical   objects.On
the other hand, the elementsof 8 could be classes, where the in-
tended valuations correspondto points of the universal class, and
where:
                  Ao,A1,...,An-1 F Bo,B1,... ,Bm-
is equivalent to:
                          ..    _            C          ..        ..      .
             Ao_    Ai              An-           Bo         B,




                     This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                          All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
798                 THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY


Or we could imaginethat 3 = {0,1}, and thereis only one inteinded
valuation: the identity function.Or... or... or.... There are a
multitude of interpretations,all encompassed within the general
theoryof conditionalassertion.
   What of the notions of proofand deduction-in the object lan-
guage? Yes, theyare includedin the rangeof the theoryalso. Thus,
given a set of basic (or: axiomatic)conditionalassertions
                                e} Fo63i
wherei c I an index set, then thereis a leastrelation F whichcon-
tains thesepairs (ai,o3B)and whichsatisfies(R), (M), and (T). The
original Fo assertions generate the F assertions with the aid of
"formalproofs."This is the most commonway we get F relations
in formallogic-and after we obtain them we then begin asking
about appropriatevaluations. And here is one point at which cut
eliminationentersmeaningfully:the generationof F from Fo may
very well be possiblewithoutrecourseto rule (T). In the end (T) is
satisfied,but we did not have to "build it in" to the definitionof F.
In this way some inductiveproofsabout F may be easy to carry
out, or theremay be othercauses forrejoicing,whenthiselimination
is possible. But, it is not always possible; and in any case no matter
how F is defined,it mustsatisfy(T) to count as a relationof condi-
tional assertion.
   Anotherword of caution: thoughforcertain F it may be appro-
priate to read 'A F B' as 'A impliesB', 'A entailsB', 'B is a conse-
quence of A', 'B is deducible fromA', or the like, it is not required
to do so. In this abstract settingwe have foundedbivalentlogic on
the conceptsofvaluationand conditionalassertion,but have leftopen
the specificationof the nature of the "statements." The theoryof
"inference"then applies to all the standard interpretations(class
algebra, Boolean algebra, two-valued algebra, formalsystems) as
well as to many nonstandardcases includingthe modal languages
which Lewis liked so well. We have to see, however,whetherthis
path leads to the properunderstanding.
                                            III
Beforetacklingmodal logic and strictimplication,it mightbe well
to review quickly how ordinarypropositionalcalculus works. In
termsof rules of inferencewe have:
       (?t )    GtF- (B(T)                  a F G~
              at F-1,(33                  a(t,T F-3
       (v)     aD F A,B,3b           (A)   a,,A,B F 63
              a F-AvB,GB                                            G,AAB   F-S
        ()     a FA,63                                  (D)          a,A F-B,(
              a, A F6                                               (t F-ADB,c6



                   This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                        All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
          ON ENGENDERING AN ILLUSION                  OF UNDERSTANDING      799

                                the assertionsabove and below the
Each of the rulesis double-edged:
double line are consideredequivalent,as inferencesthe rulesoperate
both ways.
   An immediatequestionupon seeingthe formulationof theserules
is whetherI am making a gaffein use-mentionetiquette. Quine's
firstreaction, I am sure, would be to say 'yes', but I can defend
myself.When Quine writesa rule with quasiquotes:
                                    -B,63
                                  a,A
                            a F-(AD   B)l,9M
he is thinkingof 3 as consistingof syntacticalobjects.The metalin-
guisticexpression'r(A D B)l' is his very convenientshorthandfor
the syntacticaloperationof fillingin the blanks of '( D )' with
A and B respectively.We have of course assumed that 8, the set of
sentencesor well-formed   formulasof our formallanguage,is closed
underthissyntacticaloperation.My defenseis that I am not think-
ingof 3 syntacticallyat all. I am leavingtheinterpretationof 3 open.
    In abstractpropositionalcalculus we do not care what the "state-
ments" in 3 actually are. We do assume that 3 contains special
"constant" statements(I and T) and that 3 is closed under three
binaryand one unaryoperations(v, A, D, and '). Besides the struc-
ture these operationsgive to 8, we assume furtherthat the relation
  F satisfiesall the nine rules (R), (M), (T), (I), (T), (v), (A),
 ('), and (D). The symbolslike 'v' and 'D' are symbolsof the meta-
languagenotof the object language.Thus ifthe object language had
a Polish accent and were syntactical,then we mightfindthat:
                            (A D B) = rCABl
forall A,B e S. But if the object language were class-conscious,we
mightfindthat:
                         (A vB) = (A v.B)
Thus, by thinkingmetalinguistically,  we see no confusionwas either
intendedor committed.
  Though the rulesin the above formsare veryconvenientto state,
one should note that in the case of conjunction,say, the rule (A) is
equivalent to the combinationof these threeconditionalassertions:
                                 A,B FAvB
                                 AAB FA
                                 AAB FB
It thenbecomesobvious thatno matterwhat 3 is, as longas therules
are satisfied,
               v(A AB)    1 iffv(A) = l and v(B) = 1
holds forall A,B e 3 and all consistentvaluations v e Up. We thus
concludethat rule (A) is exactlywhat we need to interpretconjunc-




                   This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                        All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
8oo                 THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY


tionsas and underconsistentvaluations. We can therefore   argue for
the completenessof the above rules in the usual way. The same fact
about consistentvaluations also leads directlyto the representation
theorem for Boolean algebraas another application of the method.
These connectionsare well known,but it is worthwhile to see how
they all fittogether.
  For futurereference,the correspondingthree assertionsfor the
materialconditionalare the following:
                           A,ADB     FB
                           B FADB
                            F A,A D B
where in the last the left-handside is empty. It means that every
consistentvaluation must eithermake A or A D B trueno matter
how "odd" the A D B combinationseems.
  It is also importantto note that the rules treat the connectives
independently: we could assume rule (A) and closureunderA,without
any otherconditionson 8, and stillbe able to make thesame remarks
about valuations of conjunctions.Merelybecause you have one con-
nective,you are not committedto the rest.I feelthisis an enormous
advantage to the Gentzen method-especially when one has strug-
gled withthe tangleof dependenciesamong primitives,as remarked
previouslyforthe originalLewis system.
                                           IV
I make the guess that Lewis would not be too happy withthe course
of thisdiscussionup to this point.The relation - would make good
sense to him, but I doubt he would be satisfiedwith our theoryof
inference.The troublewould be that the metalanguageremainsun-
formalized;somehow the inferencestake place in thin air, and he
wanted to see them, to have them embodied in a formalcalculus.
There is nothingto stop us fromformalizing   the metalanguage.Then
by a metametalinguistic  definitionwe could investigatederivedrules
of inference.(The proper definitionis not immediatelyapparent,
but that is anotherstory.) But that was not Lewis's approach: he
wanted,in effect,to injecta part ofthe metalanguageinto theobject
language with the aid of his modal operators.Or at least that is my
"rational" reconstruction of his plan. Quine calls it a use-mention
confusion;he may be right,but let us proceed further.
   We assume,at least, a set S closed under I, T, v, A, togetherwith
a relation - satisfyingthe appropriaterulesoftheprevioussections.
(For a gain in generality,we omit negationat the start.) The F re-
                        but we want to see themin black and white
lation allows inferences,
somehowreflectedin the statementsof S itself.To thisend we postu-




                   This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                        All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
          ON ENGENDERING AN ILLUSION                     OF UNDERSTANDING   80I

late that ? is closed undera new binaryoperation=~. (It seemsbetter
not to prejudicemattersby usingLewis's hook.) The problem,then,
is to imagine which rules of inferenceare appropriatefor the in-
tendedrole of =>.
   One basic rule is easy to guess; I call it '(C)':

(C)                             A FB
                               F A ==>B
The 'C' may stand eitherfor'conditionalization'or for'confusion'.
The idea is that if =X is goingto functionas a "logical" implication,
then the logical validityof a conditionalassertioncan equivalently
be "confused" with the assertionof the implicationalstatement.
  Formallyspeaking,the rule (C) is a modification   ofrule (D) given
in iII. In one directionit is a weak formof the so-called deduction
theorem;in the otherdirectionit is a weakeningof modusponens.It
seems betterat this stage notto tryto assume modusponensin the
strongerform:
(MP)                        A,A =B    I-B
Stated in thisway thereis an uncomfortablemixingof levels which
I preferto avoid until I have a better grasp of the nature of the
statementA =X B.
  As our avowed purposein introducingX was to make inferences
"visible," we should ask what this could mean. Suppose that a
certainfigureis "valid" in some good sense. The shape ofan instance
of the figurewould be, say:
                                      do          (BSo

                                      a       -

                                  a3n-1      F    Sn-1

                                      an1         (n
wherethe di, G3jare finitesubsets of S. By assumptionof the rules
(I), (T), (v), (A), the various sets can be combined into single
statements;thus, the figurecould be writtenas:
                                     Ao 1 Bo
                                     A1 I-B1

[VI                              An-,l1 Bl
                                     Anr          Bn
where the Ai, By e S. The sense in which this inferenceis "valid"
mightvery well be that it is derivablefrom"the rules." The only
troublewiththis approach is that we do not yet knowexactlywhat




                  This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                       All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
802                 THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY


the rules are. But, in an experimentalspirit,let us suppose that the
rules have already been constructedto solve the problem,and on
this assumptionwe shall tryto discoverwhat theyare.
   Now ifthe inference[V] is valid, we want to be able to transcribe
it into explicitstatementsin S. The way is quite obvious:
[H]        Ao=Bo,A,=         B,l.. * A,-B,_                          FAn=>Bn
From the "vertical" inferenceEV], we have come down to earth at
the "horizontal" conditionalassertion[H]. In otherwords,[H] is
the "visible" versionof [V]. The generalrule (I) about inferencesis
thereforethat, fromany valid [VI, we may pass to the validityof
the corresponding[H]. Note that the rule (C) already includesthe
converse; for,if an [H] is valid, the corresponding[V] may be de-
rived by several applicationsof (C).
  The descriptionof (I) just given is not very satisfactory.As
stated it is at least on the metametaleveland is thus of a different
characterfromthe otherrules. Nevertheless,the rule is easy to use,
and we give some typicalexamples.
  In the firstplace, with the aid of (C) it is seen quickly that:
                                A FB
                             A= B FC=>D
                                C FD
is valid. By (I) we can thus derive:
(MP=)        A = B, (A= B) = (C= D) F C== D
This is a weak version of modus ponens: namely,a restrictionto
statementsof the formX =X Y.
  As a second example,note the obvious validityof:
                                      *      -B
                                      B FC
                                      C FD
                                      A FD
Thus by (I) we have:
                A=*B,B=*C,C==*D                            FA =D
But then,using (C), we derive:
                            A FB
                                 C FD
                            B => C F A ='D
Anotherapplication of (I) provides:
(Thi)cdo     A Ba tC           iD a F (B             ts
                                                     C) X (Ai               fo
                                                                            D)
                                                 for==.
This conditionalassertionis a type of transitivity




                   This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                        All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
            ON ENGENDERING AN ILLUSION                   OF UNDERSTANDING         803

 As our thirdexample, recall the rule (T) itself,an instance of
whichis:
                         A k B,C
                         A,B -C
                          A kC
We may rewriteit as:
                        A FBvC
                        AAB SC
                          A FC
and then by (I) pass to:
(TvA)          A = (B v C), (AAB)                     X     C F A=            C
This last is a quite directhorizontalizationof (T).
  These examples show how applicationsof the rule (I) in collabo-
ration with rule (C) generate explicit and mildly intricatecondi-
tional assertionsinvolvingthe operation =>. Obviously, infinitely
many additional examples of the same kind may be obtained in a
similarway. Fortunately,it is not necessaryto worryabout further
examples,for these threeschemata sufficeforthe reductionof the
rule (I) down to the ordinarymetalevel.More specifically,
                                                        the meta-
theoreticresult I have obtained may be formulatedas follows:
     Suppose a system is set up with 3 assumed closed under
   I, T, v, A,and =*, and possiblyotheroperations.Suppose that
  the F relationis constrainedat least by the rules:
                      (R), (M), (T),
                      (1I), (T), (v), (A)I
                       Pt) (MP==), (T=*)t MAL^
  Then, no matterwhat additional rules of the normalkind are
  adjoined, the systemwill also satisfy(I) withrespectto all de-
  rived rules [V].
Strictlyspeaking,this result is a metametatheorem,because it con-
cernstypesof systemsratherthan a particular8 and particular F.
I thinkits importis clear,however.The rules (MP=>), (T=o), (TvA)
were firstshown to be necessary, and then they proved to be
sufficient.9
   The sense of 'sufficient'must be carefullydescribed. A logistic
systemis a language 8 (withits various closureconditions)together
  9 A systemsomewhat   similarto theone presented herecan be foundin W. and
M. Kneale, TheDevelopment  ofLogic (Oxford:University   Press,1962),pp. 559-
568. Kneale,however,confusesF and X and treats ?* as a multiary  connective.
He uses a natural-deduction  formalizationof his rules. He assumes(MP) and
favorsa strongrule that amountsto S5. He did not seem to be aware of the
metatheorem about (I) thatis themainpointofourdiscussion.




                     This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                          All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
804                 THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY


witha relation F of conditionalassertion (sometimescalled an en-
tailmentrelation or a consequencerelation-depending on whether
the relationor its converseis emphasizedmore). What is confusing
is that we are seldomsatisfiedwiththe contemplationofone specific
system; rather we axiomatize whole classes of systems. What is
doublyconfusingis that certainlanguagesconstructedsyntactically
 (so that theirstatementscontain "variables" or schematicletters)
can be pressedinto servicealong with suitable entailmentrelations
to do duty as genericrepresentatives  of theirclass. (Mathematicians
oftenspeak of "free" algebras in a similarconnection.)My present
positionis that the single-mindedpursuitof these genericexamples
is a mistake: the interestreally lies in the classes. We must, there-
fore,ascend to the higherlanguage level. We are much betteroff
thinkingabout what I earliercalled abstractpropositionalcalculus-
forreasons given and, I hope, illustrated.That metatheorycan be
(fragmentarily)self-appliedis interestingand important,but the
device must be viewed in the propersetting.
   For the typeof =X systemwe have been discussing,a confusionof
levels would bringinstant chaos. A horizontalizationfrom[V] to
[H] makes intuitivesense only if [V] has general,not accidental
validity.Hence the rule [V], as an inference,must be derivablefrom
theotherassumedrules-if one is goingto play safeabout generality.
Rules are statementsin the metalanguage; derivabilityof rules is
defined in the metametalanguage.This situation points up the
reason why it is betterto call a metastatement:


a conditionalassertionrather than an entailmentrelationship.The,
words 'entailment'and 'consequence' harbor an echo of syntactic
shuffling-especiallyto us who have spentso muchtimefoolingwith
formalsystems.But no followingof "rules" in gettingfroma to 65
ought to be intended.
  What is confusingcan be illustrated by a simple conditional
assertion:
                            A,B -C
If we assume this to hold in a given system,then the followingin-
ferenceis correct:
                                  A
                                  B

If we think of the conditional assertion as an inferencewithout
premises,then the passage is a derivationof one rule fromanother




                   This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                        All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
           ON ENGENDERING AN ILLUSION                  OF UNDERSTANDING     805

(withthe aid of the always assumed rule, (T), of course). However,
a moment'sthoughtwillshow that the two rulesare notequivalent:
the conditional assertion is the stronger.Nevertheless,we often
reach desirableconclusionsby tossingaround conditionalassertions
as if theywere nothingmorethan the weakerrules. Success seldom
requiresanalysis-failure always ought to.
                                 v
We can now say somethinggood about materialimplication,since
the reader will have noticedthat the rule (D) gives morethan (C),
(MP=), (T,), and (TVA). To be precise,considerany systematiza-
tion based on at least the rules forclassical propositionalcalculus.
Then the generalresultof the last sectionassuresus that,say, a rule
of the form:
                                       A FB
                                       C FD
is deducible if and only if the conditionalassertion:
                              ADB            FJCjD
is deducible. In otherwords,withincertaincontexts     materialimplica-
tion is quite adequate formakinginferences"visible." It seems to
me that thisexplainswhythereis generallyverylittleneed forgoing
beyond material implication. Even though the statementA D B
does not mean in itselfthat A entailsB, a relationshipsuch as that
displayedabove betweentwo D statementshas the same forceas an
inferencefromone entailmentto another.
   It seemssafe to say that Lewis wouldnot have been reallysatisfied
by the remarkjust made about D. In discussingimplicationand de-
ducibilityhe says:
     Thus not only may a relationof truth-implication    give rise to
   inference,but also it givesrise to inference
                                              in such a mannerthat
   whenthepremiseis a law ofthesystem,theconsequentalso willbe
   a law of the system.The principlesof StrictImplicationexpress
   thefactsabout any such deductionin an explicitmannerin which
   theycannotbe expressedwithinthe truth-value      systemitself,for
   the reasonthat,in StrictImplication,what is tautologicalis dis-
   tinguishablefromwhatis merelytrue,whereasthisdifference      does
   notordinarily appearin thesymbolsof a truth-value   system.
     In thelightof all thesefacts,it appearsthattherelationofstrict
  implication expressespreciselythatrelationwhichholdswhenvalid
  deductionis possible,and failsto holdwhenvalid deductionis not
  possible.In thatsense,thesystemofStrictImplicationmaybe said
   to providethat canon and critiqueofdeductiveinference    whichis
  the desideratum  of logicalinvestigation. All the factsabotutthose




                   This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                        All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
806                  THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY


  cases in whichany otherimplication-relationmay genuinelygive
  rse to inferenceare incorporatedin and explainedby the laws of
  thissystem-ortheymaybe so incorporated   by introducingtheim-
                  in questionintothesystembydefinition
  plication-relation                                  (SL, 247).
   Part of the trouble in tryingto accommodate all of Lewis's de-
mands is the real confusionbetweenvalidityand deducibility,    which
surelyrestson a use/mentionconfusionthat can be resolvedonlyby
separatingthe language levels. A certainamountof help can be pro-
vided with the aid of valuations and an extensionof language.
   Assumethat a particularsystemwithan 3 and a F has beengiven,
satisfyingall the rulesofclassical propositionalcalculus. We can also
assume a set V of intendedvaluations as explained in section ii.
Thus A F B holds just in case it is valid in the sense that, forall
v e V, ifv(A) = 1, thenv(B) = 1. Now extend 3 to a largerset 8* of
statementsclosed under -1, T, v, A, , D, and a new operation=>.
(This can be done in many ways; we should of coursetake care that
the old meaningsof the classical connectivesare consistentlyex-
tendedto the largerset.) If we are cleverin how we construct3*, we
shall be able to extendeach v e V to a v* definedon 8* satisfyingthe
usual conditionswith respect to the classical connectives.In addi-
tion,we shall be freeto specifyforv e V and forall A,B e 3* that
   v*(A =*B)   =   liff,forallweV,ifw*(A)                         = 1,thenw*(B) = 1
Such a constructioncan certainlybe carriedout along standardlines.
We thus obtain
                                CO*= {V*:v el)}

as the set of intendedvaluations for8*. This allows us thento define
 F*, whichproves to be an extensionof the given F.
  What is accomplishedby such a construction?I assert that it is
always possible to expand language and entailmentin a coherent
fashionso that deductionsabout the new systemwillnot give us any
incorrectconclusionsabout the old system; moreovera sentential
operator=X is introducedso that the truthof (A => B) fora valua-
tion of the systemis equivalentto the holdingof A F* B. We could
not do thiswithmaterialimplicationand it seemsto me to be pretty
much what Lewis wanted.
   Note that, in the constructionjust outlined,not only do we have
the properrules for > fromsection iv, but =* also satisfies(MP).
Considerany such system.Define a unary operationon statements
by the equation:
                          OA = (T =A)




                    This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                         All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
          ON ENGENDERING AN ILLUSION                   OF UNDERSTANDING                807

It is quite easy to prove the following:
                                  A==B            FHZ(ADB)
                            EI(ADB)               FA =*B
                   E1A,E(A D B) FEB
                            OA F A
                                        OA F OOA
and
                                            -A
                                         F DA
This is nothingmore than the Lewis systemS4 withEl as necessity
and =X as strictimplication.Actuallyin the constructionof 3* we will
findthat F* satisfiesthe strongerrules of S5; in particular:
                                               O -OA
                                F DA,
A moresubtle constructionof the extensionof the valuations would
have avoided this feature,but the details need not concernus here.
   I feelthat thisdiscussionnearlyvindicatesLewis. We have shown
how a theoryof strictimplicationcan be graftedonto any systemof
classical propositionalcalculus. We hasten to add, however,that the
extensionresultdoes requirean expansionof the notion of a state-
ment.Quine may wish to object at this point. He mightbe inclined
to say that our 8* is just a fragmentof the metalanguageinto which
we have injected the originalobject language S. It is just a mathe-
matical trickwherebywe allow ourselves to regard S* as another
object language. (I do not wishto put wordsintoQuine's mouth,but
the objection is reasonable.) The answer is, yes, the construction
could be viewed this way; but even if one insistson this view, one
cannotgo on to claim that any act ofconfusionhas been committed.
The language S* togetherwithits valuations (truththeory)is quite
definite, and we can showhowtotransfer   certainresultsabout S* back
to S. That one maynotcare to use S*forinvestigationsabout 3 is one's
ownconcern;however,no mistakeis involvedin makinguse of 3*.
   WhetherLewis would agree to this interpretation,   or whetherhe
would feel I have done damage to his programcan no longerbe de-
termined,and the readerwill have to judge forhimself.Fortunately
we can still ask forQuine's opinion.Lewis himselfpreferred   weaker
systemseven than S4. The morerecentworkon semanticsformodal
logiccan be used to understandthe formalnatureofhis systems,but
it mightbe interestingto reexaminehis argumentsin the lightof the
resultof section iv.
                                                                            DANA   SCOTT
PrincetonUniversity




                   This content downloaded on Fri, 8 Feb 2013 08:14:23 AM
                        All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
