  Theoretical Computer Science 121 (1993) 411-440                                                                        411
  Elsevier




        A type-theoretical alternative to
        ISWIM, CUCH, OWHY
        Dana S. Scott
        Carnegie-Mellon         University, Pittsburgh, PA,     USA, and RISC-Linz,    Austria




       Abstract

        Scott,   D.S.,   A    type-theoretical   alternative   to ISWIM,    CUCH,    OWHY,       Theoretical    Computer
       Science 121 (1993) 411-440.
       The paper (first written in 1969 and circulated privately) concerns the definition, axiomatization, and
       applications of the hereditarily monotone and continuous functionals generated from the integers
       and the Booleans (plus “undefined” elements). The system is formulated as a typed system of
       combinators (or as a typed /-calculus) with a recursion operator (the least fixed-point operator), and
       its proof rules are contrasted            to a certain extent with those of the untyped          A-calculus.     For
       publication (1993), a new preface has been added, and many                bibliographical references and com-
       ments in footnotes have been appended.




Preface (1993)

    The main part of the text of this paper was written in England in October, 1969,
 mid-way through the term the author spent on leave from Princeton University
 visiting Professor Christopher Strachy and his Programming Research Group at
 Oxford University. The preparation of this paper for its long-delayed publication has
been done while the author was on sabbatical leave from Carnegie Mellon University
visiting Professor Bruno Buchberger at his Research Institute for Symbolic Computa-
tion at the Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria. The author is very much
indebted not only to the universities mentioned for these various opportunities to take
leave and to enjoy hospitality at the places visited, but also to Todd and Mary Wilson
and Kim Wagner for typing the manuscript from a very old photocopy of a typescript,
for writing and fixing the necessary TEX macros to typeset the new version as
a report, and for helping assemble the bibliography.



Correspondence     to: D.S.    Scott, Computer      Science,   Carnegie-Mellon   University,   Pittsburgh,     PA   15213-
3890, USA. Email: dana.scott@cs.cmu.edu.                                .

0304-3975/93/$06.00      ©     1993—Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. All rights reserved
412                                      D.S. Scott


      The author is also much indebted to the editors of this volume for the welcome
suggestion that such “historical” papers might be published this way. This particular
paper has, of course, an odd historical role: in it the author argues against the type-free
calculi of Church and Curry, Kleene and Rosser, and their later uses by BOhm and
Strachey. But then in November of 1969, after writing this report, the author himself
saw that the method of monotone continuous functions (which grew out of traditional
recursive function theory in discussing certain kinds of functionals) could be applied
to posets other than just those generated from the integers (with bottom) by the very
simple type constructors. In particular, it was recognized that there were posets whose
continuous function spaces of self-maps could be identified with the given posets
themselves. And so there actually were “traditional” models of A-calculus that could
be defined without first going through the proof theory of the formal system itself (and
which could be related to many other mathematically meaningful structures and
theories as well).
   This revelation was both gratifying and embarrassing. After writing with tiresome
sarcasm about the lack of meaning in the type-free A-calculus introduced only
formally, the author himself found an interesting kind of semantical interpretation for
the “type-free” language. This total shift of gears is the reason the present paper was
not published: the foundational program being advocated had apparently been
completely outmoded by the discovery of the more general lattice-theoretic models.
However, the axiomatic program laid out here had much to recommend it, and it was
continued and extended in many directions by Milner, Plotkin, and many others, to
whom the paper had been circulated privately — often at nth hand. Gunter in his book
[9, p. 143] remarks, “The language PCF itself was introduced by Scott in what is
probably the most well-known unpublished manuscript in Programming Language
Theory”. That exaggerates history somewhat, but the proof system proposed was in
fact one of the main motivations for Milner to make automated proofs for such
axiomatics (see [8, p. 153]). And this project in turn led directly to the definition,
design and implementation of the programming language ML — a very important
event in the history of computer languages, since ML has since prospered and taken
on a role, importance and life of its own never dreamed of in the mid-1970s. Moreover,
the completeness problem for the theory of the type system of this paper turned out to
be far more delicate than was initially apparent (see the historical introduction to the
Kahn—Plotkin paper in this volume).
   On the other hand, the type-theoretical approach has not died out at all, because it
has been taken over and absorbed into the applications of category theory to
semantics and computation theory. The author is fond of saying that a category
represents the “algebra of types”, just as abstract rings give us the algebra of
polynomials, originally understood to concern only integers or rationals. One can of
course think only of particular type systems, but, for a full understanding, one really
needs also to take into account the general theory of types, and especially translations
or interpretations of one system in another. Category theory together with the notion
of functor and natural transformation between functors has been proved over and
                        A type-theoretical alternative to ISWIM,   CUCH, OWHY         413


over again in the last half-century to be the appropriate way to go about these studies.
The author himself does not always like or enjoy the discipline of category theory,
which seems ofttimes to carry along very, very heavy machinery and odd terminology,
but he long ago came to the conclusion that it is quite unavoidable. The extremely
active current research in semantics also shows that it is an especially fruitful way to
think. The book of Gunter [9] with its wide-ranging historical comments and
references is adequate proof of this assertion.
   The strange title of this paper ought perhaps to be explained. In 1966, Landin
published an influential paper [14] which introduced a syntactical design style for
programming languages, one of which he called ISWIM, standing for “If you See
What I Mean”. Also B6hm in 1966 published the paper [3] which named a language
of combinators called CUCH, standing for “Curry—Church”. There seemed to be
a worrisome trend in funny acronyms starting here (of which perhaps the ultimate
examplar is the well-known and very widely used editing/programming interface
called GNU, recursively standing for “GNU is NOT Unix”). The author hoped to
stop some proliferation by suggesting a return to the logically standard type-theoret-
ical framework and thereby deter the creation of programming languages of doubtful
foundation called (as a group) OWHY, standing for “Or What Have You.” No one
really understood the joke, and the effort was doomed to be of no avail. And history
proved the author to be too conservative in any case.
   In the body of the paper footnotes giving relevant comments and some references
have been added for this publication. A brief afterthought has been added as a last
section. Some comments in the original text have also been transposed to footnotes to
help readability. Several editorial changes and corrections were incorporated, but the
original text has essentially been preserved. The bibliography is to be found at the end
of the paper.



0. Introduction (1969)

   No matter how much wishful thinking we do, the theory of types is here to stay.
There is no other way to make sense of the foundations of mathematics. Russell (with
the help of Ramsey) had the right idea, and Curry and Quine are very lucky that their
unmotivated formalistic systems are not inconsistent.’ This is not to disparage
formalistic work. In my view it is only through formalism that we can find a clear idea
of the scope of mathematical knowledge. And I freely admit that one’s research may be
advanced by some purely formalistic play with symbols. My point is that formalism
without eventual interpretation is in the end useless. Now, it may turn out that a system
such as the /-calculus will have an interpretation along standard lines (and I have
spent more days than I care to remember trying to find one), but until it is produced


  1 The author still believes this statement.
414                                                D.S. Scott


I would like to argue that its purposes can just as well be fulfilled by a system
involving types. Indeed, as far as proofs are concerned, the system with types seems to
be much better.”
   It is a pity that a system such as Zermelo—Fraenkel set theory is usually presented in
a purely formal way, because the conception behind it is quite straightforwardly based
on type theory. One has the concept of an arbitrary subset of a given domain and that
the collection of all subsets of the given domain can form a new domain (of the next
type!). Starting with a domain of individuals (possibly empty), this process of
forming subsets is then iterated into the transfinite. Thus, each set has a type
(or rank) given by the ordinal number of the stage at which it is first to be found
in the iteration. One advantage of this method is that the types are built into the
sets themselves and need not be made manifest in the formalism. (Computer people
might say that the type checking in set theory is done at runtime rather than at compile
time.) One disadvantage is that people tend to forget what is out of sight. But it is
there, and one can make quite clear what is the type-theoretic background of set
theory.°
    For the purposes of understanding computation, however, set-theoretical formal-
ism is not too helpful in any direct way. In the first place, too much of set theory
concerns the transfinite, and ordinary computation has rather to do with finite
processes. In the second place the axioms of set theory are meant to capture
something essential of the idea of an arbitrary subset, while computation theory is
more interested in the notion of an algorithmically defined subset (or function). Of
course, one can define in set theory such notions as that of a general recursive
function, but such definitions do not emphasize enough what 1s special about algo-
rithms. Nor is it generally clear when a defined function is recursive. So what we want
is a “restricted” system that is specially designed for algorithms.* What I shall present
below is an independent system with its own axioms and rules; but, since I observe the
canons of type theory, it can be (and indeed must be) read as a fragment of set theory
so that its theorems can be recognized as valid. This is the main feature missing from
the A-calculus. Now I have only thought of this system in the last few days, so it may
still be imperfect.° However, none of it is wrong (as will be seen from the simple
character of the system), and it does seem to do in a much better way what I discussed



   2 This statement remarkably remains true! Even with the subsequent 20-year development of the theory
of domains, the proof principles for recursively defined (or reflexive) domains are still being discovered. This
can be well appreciated by reading the two very recent papers of Pitts [18, 19].
   3 Though set theory, and especially ZF set theory, underwent a truly vast development in the last 30
years, the common understanding of the type structure is probably not yet fully appreciated — to judge by
the many arguments the author has had with category theorists.
   +The subsequent development of intuitionistic ZF and the expansion of realizability interpretations has
completely changed this position. Unfortunately, the axiomatics of “synthetic domain          theory” have not
been completely clarified so that a convenient foundation for computation theory and semantics can be
given in set-theoretic terms (see [12, 25] and the references therein).
  > The report was written at one sitting over a very short period and never revised.
                        A type-theoretical alternative to   ISWIM,     CUCH, OWHY                             415


as the “algebraic theory of procedures” in my talk on the last day of the W.G. 2.2
meeting in Essex.°



1. Types

    The first confusion we should avoid is that between logical types and what we might
call data types. The former are what we invoke to study the latter. The theory of data
types requires the logical types (and certain notions about objects of these types) for its
formalization. For example, the idea of the set of all subsets of a set is a logical notion
(or mathematical notion, if you prefer), because neither it, nor for that matter the
“general” set, can ever present itself as an object of data — in any ordinary sense of that
word. However, set-theoretical notions can be quite useful when, for instance, we wish
to say that the set of all data (of a certain kind) has no proper subset with a particular
property (say, of being closed under a specific operation). I like to imagine the data at
the lowest logical type being structured by certain (fixed) relations and functions
(objects of a higher logical type) and the theory of these allowing reference to (variable)
objects of all the higher types — as in the example mentioned above.’
    Obviously, for a good theory we want to be able to sort out data into different
categories (types?), and (this is where the confusion begins) we want to study many
derived types. As a simple example we could think of persons as forming a basic type
and organizations as forming a derived type. By an organization I suppose we all
understand a sort of tree of persons. It has a head (a person) and some branches which
give the “chain of command”. Well, there is no confusion here; where the problem lies
is in this: the objects of the various logical types are richly structured. As we all know,
the theory of trees (of persons, say) can easily be simulated or modelled by objects of
higher logical types (oh, a “mathematical” tree is an ordered pair of a set together with
a relation that partially orders the set — in a special way). Now is this a good thing?
Sometimes yes, sometimes no. If we think of organizations as occurring in “nature”,
then we do not want to identify them with the mathematical models. It is like the
distinction between abstract and concrete syntax: there 1s not always a good reason to
consider an expression to be a string (sequence mathematically?) of symbols. Why?
Because the string-oriented methods of breaking an “expression” into “parts” might
not lead to the correct or useful notion of part. Similarly with organizations.
   To put the point in another way: it seems best to allow ourselves the freedom of
keeping our data types as primitives. Computers have taught us this. Think of the
numbers. There is no unique representation of numbers, and we do not want to choose
a particular one. All we really want to say is that they form one data type and that they


   © The meeting was in the summer of 1969, and the method discussed there was from the long-unpublished
de Bakker—Scott paper [6].
  7And consider the     subsequent   development    of “concrete     domains”   by   many   authors   after   the
Kahn-—Plotkin report.
416                                                    D.S. Scott


have a certain structure. (I suppose they can be added, say, and can be tested in pairs
for equality or order.) Indeed we may require several different types of numbers. In our
 theory about these numbers we very much want the results to be “machine indepen-
 dent”. That is, the theorems ought to be valid for all representations — satisfying
 certain explicit structural conditions. (Equals added to equals remain equal?)
     This attitude was somewhat obscured by Russell’s approach to mathematics: he
 wanted to reduce mathematics to logic. How? By defining number. (The number two is
 the set of all two-element sets — be careful of type distinctions here!) The program is
 not quite successful. Why? Because one must still postulate the existence of an infinite
 set (a data type?) in order to have “enough” numbers. Set theory gets around this point
 by going to transfinite types! It is not exactly cheating, but it is not really satisfactory
 either. For our purposes it is much better to give a theory (theories) of number rather
 than definitions of number. And the same applies to the other data types. What we are
 going to do is to take what we need from Russell’s logic without taking over his
philosophy of mathematics.
    Actually, it is fairer to say that we are stealing from Church’s logic rather than
 Russell’s, because my notation is closer to that of Church.? The reason is that for
algorithms it is more natural to consider functions rather than sets. We can reduce the
notion of function to that of set, but it is not convenient to do so. A much better plan is
to treat sets (and relations) as special functions (truth-valued) as Church does.
    To start with we have two “logical” types represented by the Greek letters 1 and o in
Church’s notation. The first, 1, stands for the type of all individuals. I consider it to be
the largest data type; all other data types are to be “included” in it — hence it is clearly
a logical notion. (The exact way of treating the other data types will be discussed
below.) The second, 0, is the type of the truth values — a very logical notion. These are
the two logical types of the lowest order. The higher types are represented as follows: If
a and f are types, then so is (af). What (a) represents is the type of functions from
objects of type a to those of type B. Again a logical construct.
    To be more precise, we must distinguish between type symbols and the (sets of)
objects of the corresponding type. Type symbols are strings of “1”, “o”, “+” “(”, and
“)”. From my informal remarks in the last paragraph, anyone can write down the
“grammar” for this (context-free) “language”, and I shall not bother to do so. Aside
from this collection of type symbols, we will also have a rich language of expressions.
Each expression will have a (unique) type, and I shall write X: « to mean that the
expression X is of type «. Again we must be careful to distinguish the expressions from
what objects they denote. More on this later.
   In the first place as expressions we shall allow, for each type a, an infinite list of
variables denoted as follows by lower-case letters:

                                           /        /  tf
          Ag,   Dy   +++5Xas   Vas Zas   Ay, sey   Zag      sss.




 ® This goes back to the well-known paper [4].
                          A type-theoretical alternative to ISWIM,   CUCH,   OWHY                    417


(I suppose I should do all this in abstract syntax because no one really cares what my
variables look like. But I don’t have time to fuss.) Those subscripted variables are in
the object language of expressions. In my metalanguage I use unsubscripted x, y, z, etc.
to range over variables of any type. The unsubscripted capital letters range over
compound expressions.
   The compounds are made from the variables and constants by a certain rule. The
constants are divided into two main classes: the logical and nonlogical constants.
I choose not to discuss the latter at the moment — just remember to save room for
them. And remember in general that any expression has its type — which must be given
in the case of constants (and variables). The logical constants are infinite in number (so
are the types); I list them along with their types («, 6, y are arbitrary type symbols):

           Q,:1,          2,10,           T 30,    1:0,

           D_i(o>(a>                (a> a))),
           Kig:(a>(B > «)),
           Sap): ((4>(B > 7) > (a>                B) > (4),
           Y,:((a7a)—>
                     a).
One can probably guess what they mean, but I leave that discussion for the next section.”
  As for the other expressions, suppose X:a and F:(«—); then we have

           F(X): 8.
That is to say the standard function-value notation is the only way in which
compounds can be made. Note that the type of X must fit the type of F for F(X) to be
well formed. Note, too, how complicated the types of our constants are. In particular,
it is possible to form an expression of any type using only constants and no variables.
    By a formula, we understand either an atomic formula of the form

           X<Y,
where X and Y           are expressions, or a list

           Py,     ,,   Pp,   wep   Dy_

(possibly empty!) of atomic formulae @;. We identify the one-termed list with the
atomic formula.!° (Since my natural syntax is string-like, note that in view of the fact
that the concatenation of expressions is never an expression, we can write a list
of atomic formulae without commas. Let us not worry about such small points,
however.) If ¥ and @ are two lists, then (in the metalanguage!)

           @cV


   °Kleene and many other logicians had used typed combinators, but the languages with the typed
fixed-point combinator had not been considered all that much in 1969 except by Platek in his thesis [20].
   10 The lists of atomic formulae are really conjunctions, as is explained later.
418                                              D.S. Scott


means that every atomic formula in © also occurs in ¥. (The symbol “<” is a symbol
of the object language; similarly for “F”.)
   By an assertion, we understand a string of the form

            OLY,

where ® and Y are lists of atomic formulae. Intuitively lists of formulae are just
conjunctions and - gives an implication between conjunctions — but this will all be
clear when we find out in the next section the meanings of all our symbols. After that
we will discuss axioms and rules of inference for generating the (or a good part of the)
valid assertions in an “algebraic” way.
   If ® is a list and F is an expression of the same type as a variable x, then

            ®[ F/x]

denotes the result of substituting F for x throughout ©.
  We need a few abbreviations. If X and Y are expressions of the same type, then

            X=Y
stands for the list
            X<Y,Y<X.

If F is an expression, and if          F(X)(Y)(Z)    is well formed, then we abbreviate this as

            F(X, Y, Z).
Similarly, for more than three terms. (Note this abbreviation is a convention in the
metalanguage and is not — at the moment — “sugaring” in the object language.) Also,
we have only 2, and Q, at the lowest type. For higher types we define 2,,=) to be the
expression:                                                       |

            Kp_(82¢):(%—B).
The notation

            > a(B)(X)(Y)
is not common.        We usually write

            (BX, Y),
but we also need >, for general purposes.*?


  1! Subsequently, the author’s notation changed because it was confusing (he felt) to use either < or € for
the information ordering within a domain. He thus adopted the “square” notation of c from lattice theory.
This brought along m and uw and took | for the bottom element instead of Q. It still seems to the author
a better notation, but too many people prefer to write the easier <. However, in a system that might involve
integers, sets (say as elements of power domains), and the information ordering, it seems cleaner to have
different symbols for different notions.
                               A type-theoretical alternative to IS WIM,
                                                                             CUCH, OWHY                           419

    2. Interpretation

       The classical way of viewing the theory of
                                                  types is to assign to each type a a domain
    D,, where D, is a given domain of individuals,
                                                      D, is the domain of two truth values
    (denoted by T and 1 for true and false), and each
                                                      D,,.-.s) is the domain                ionsof all funct
     from D, with values in Dg. This point of view
                                                        is not convenient for Our purposes. The
     reason is simple: classical type theory suppo
                                                     ses total (everywhere defined) functions,
    while algorithms in general produce partia
                                                     l functions. We do not wish to reject
    a program if the function defined is partia
                                                   l — because as everyone knows it is not
    possible to predict which programs will “loop
                                                      ” and which will define tota] functions.
       The solution to this problem of total versus
                                                          partial functions is to make a “math-
    ematical model” for the theory of partial funct
                                                      ions using ordinary total functions. The
   idea is not at all original to the author (he
                                                  has taken it from more “standard” versions
   of recursive function theory — in particular,
                                                       from the thesis of Platek [20]). Other
   authors in recursive function theory discussed
                                                       monotone and “hereditarily consistent”
   functionals, notably Kleene, Rogers, Putna
                                                  m and Davis, but there may be a few points
   of originality. In one direction, the axiomatiza
                                                      tion of the next section — especially the
   induction rule — is original as far as the autho
                                                       r knows.
      What we do is to adjoin a “fictitious” eleme
                                                      nt Q, to the domain D, and an element
  92, to D,. We call Q, the “undefined” indiv
                                                  idual and Q, the “undefined” truth value.
  However, we need to distinguish the new
                                                 elements from the old. To do this we create
  arelation < on D,and < on D, (same symbo
                                                   l — different relations) meaning, roughly,
  “Is less or equally defined as”. Thus, a reaso
                                                    nable assumption is that
              Q,<x

 for all xeD,; but that

             x<y
 implies

             xX=y
 for x, yeD, with x #Q,.12 We make this assum
                                              ption about                          < on D,, but for the
 moment not about D,. Thus, a “picture”
                                        of D, could be

             a                  T




                     Q2,
  ’2Tfrom the original text]    I am sorry that I must use the same symbol
                                                                             s in the metalanguage as some of
those in the object language. It is a sad fact that
                                                    there are just too few symbols. If I were more
quotes I would say that    the symbol
                                                                                                   careful with
                                      “<” is being given the interpretation
Hopefully, the reader can take the required care                            of denoting the relation <.
                                                 in his own thought.
420                                                D.S. Scott


with the slanting lines indicating <. We are therefore involved with a three-valued
“logic” with the new value Q, “in between” T and 1 but placed “a little lower down”.
(Look at the picture!) We shall see presently how good a three-valued logic we have.*?
(Similar pictures could be given for the “reasonable” view of D,.)
   The upshot of all this is that D, and D, are partially ordered by <. What about
Do-y for example? Well, what is Da? In the classical version we took all functions;
not so here. We want only the monotonic functions (as we shall find later — at most
these). By monotonic we understand a function f: D, — D, (this is the usual mathemat-
ical notation) where x < y implies f (x) < f(y). In words this means: the more you define
an argument, the more you define its value under a “computable” function. The same
idea can be applied to a variable fin the combination f(x). That is to say, if we define

              f<g

to mean


              f(x) <g(x)
for all xeD,, then the combination f(x) is monotonic in both f and x, and the set
Do is partially ordered. Note that there is a natural “smallest” element among the
elements of Dy_,,,, namely the function Q,_,,, such that

              OQq +1) (X) = QQ,

for all xeD,. Note too that once Dg., has its own <, we can then define Dy ,), and
Dia)» ete., by the same plan of taking only the monotonic functions. Indeed we
can now define D, for every type symbol «.
   The plan just described of using monotonic functions is almost correct, but not
quite. An example will make it all clear. Let D,={0,1,2,...}                       U{Q,}, the domain of
ordinary integers plus Q,. In pictures:




 Now the monotonic functions f are almost like ordinary functions except we allow

              f(n)=Q,

 for certain arguments n if we so desire. If we read this equation as: fis undefined at n,
 then we agree that fis defined only for a subset of the integers. Conversely, if fo 1s
 defined on a subset S of the integers, with integer values, then we can extend fo to


      13 K Jeene introduced such a three-valued logic in [13], and it has been discussed by many, many authors.
                           A type-theoretical alternative to ISWIM,   CUCH, OWHY                        421


a monotonic function f by defining

                      o(n)       if neS,
           fin)=} Q,             otherwise.

This requires f(Q,)=Q,. Such functions we call strict. Not all functions need be strict;
we allow the constant functions, say

           g(x)=0,         all xeD,,

where g(Q,)4#Q,. The need for the distinction between strict and nonstrict functions
will become clear later.**
  We have not yet seen the difficulty with monotonic functions,                           however. The
Di. Just described is fine. It is only when we come to Dw,                                 that there is
a question. An element             he Di .,)4 18 a functional. The equation

           h(f)=n,
where feDy-,, and neD, means that h “computes” the value n from the argument f-
But fis a function; an infinite object (e.g. it may have infinitely many function values).
What does it mean to “compute” with an “infinite” argument? In this case it means
most simply that h(f) is determined by asking of f (maybe by some algorithmic
process) finitely many questions — that 1s to say, values:

           f (mo),   fm      ), seeyf   (My—1).


That is, as a functional h is continuous in some sense. Now fortunately we do not need
at this point to involve ourselves in topology to any great extent. We can use our
partial ordering < to pin down what we need most.
   Note that even though D, is a very trivial partially ordered set, Dy_,,) is not. The
partial ordering on Dg-_,,) is quite complex (at least as bad as the Boolean algebra of all
sets of integers — if not worse). In particular, we can form in Dy-_,,, many infinite chains
of functions:

           fo<fi<fo <9              <fa<

For example, let f(x)=x for all xeD, and define

                      x        for x=0,1,2,...,n,
            nlX)=                         .
           Jnl)      to,       otherwise.

Then the f, form a chain in the above sense and each f,<f. Actually it is easy to see
that fis the least upper bound of the f, in the sense of the partial ordering < on Dy.)


  14 But of course it did not become clear until very much later that there are many different categories of
domains, and that sometimes it is necessary to work only with strict functions and to have functors that
“lift” continuous functions to strict functions.
422                                              D.S. Scott


We    can write




In fact, Da... has the property that every chain has a lub. What does this have to do




           (Seria
with continuity? Well, it is easy to show in an intuitive way that




holds for every chain of f, if h is continuous. What we are going to do is to take the
above equation as the abstract definition of continuity. (Note that the lub operation
trivially works in the ground domain D,.)
   To be a bit more precise: suppose D, and D, have been defined and partially
ordered by < relations in such a way that lubs of chains always exist. Then for
Diag) We allow only those functions h: D, > Dg, that are at the same time monotonic
and continuous. This space D,,.,,) has a natural partial ordering, and (as should be
proved by the reader) lubs of chains always exist in D,,..,). (Hint:

           (V hy \(s)= \V hng(x).)
             n=0               n=0


Note that with this convention the application operation f(x) is always monotonic
and continuous in each of f and x.
   We have now defined the domains D, for all «, which means that all we have done
so far is to specify the ranges of our variables x,.(Note that D, can be any “abstract” set
with a < satisfying the lub condition. One should not always restrict attention to the
integers.) The next step is to specify the meanings of the constants. Now we obviously
want the symbols “Q,”,“Q,”,“T”, “.” to stand for the values Q2,,Q2,, 1, L. The other
constants are functions and must be so defined. Thus,

                               fx      if p=T,
            >i(p,X,yJ=4          y     if p=l,
                               L Q,    if p=Q,,

for all peD,, x, yeD,, where Q,¢D, has already been defined. Next

           K(x, y)=xX
for all xeD, and yeD,. Then

           Sapy(f   Y; x) =f    (x, g(x))

for all feDi+(g+y)), 9EDia— pg), and xED,. The definition of ¥ is more difficult.
   Already we should be forced to prove something in order to see that the above
definitions “make sense”. In particular, we need to know that the functions
>,>K.,S2g, do belong to the correct domains. This means that we must show (1)
                          A type-theoretical alternative to ISWIM,           CUCH, OWHY              423


that they are well-defined functions, and (2) that they are monotonic and continuous.
Actually, this all follows from a “composition theorem” for monotonic and continu-
ous functions; we give a representative example of an instance of this theorem.

Theorem 2.1. Suppose functions g,h,k are monotonic and continuous, and suppose f is
defined by the equation

            f(x,   y)=g (h(x, y), k(x, y)).
Then, f is monotonic and continuous (in each of its variables).

  The monotonic part of the theorem is obvious. To prove the continuity we must




            Sjons)s(o S00)
calculate




                      (o( eo)
                                    o( V hts yh V. ktm) )
                                                        m=0




                                    V,   V   gl h(x,    y)    K(Xms   y)).



Now we note that in a partially ordered set a lub of lubs is just the lub over the double
index set (in this case over the pairs (I, m).) Furthermore, to calculate a lub it is
sufficient to find the lub of a cofinal subset. In our case the elements
g(h(Xn» y)s K(X», y)) are cofinal, because we assume the x, form a chain (x,<X,+1), and
if n=max(I, m), then

              g(h(x1,   y), K(Xm>    y))<g(h(x,,       y), K (Xn, y))

by monotonicity. Hence,


             r(    V    Xn> »)-     VV   g(h(xy, y), K(Xn- y))



                               = Vi fn y).

Thus, f(x, y) is continuous in x.
   It is clear that the proof just given applies for any number of variables. Note too
that the variables are independent               and may         belong to different domains.   Thus, in
our example we could have had: xeD,, yeDz, hEDia+(gy))> KEDia+(p8)),            and
géDiy+(s+«)) producing feD(_-(g-+2)). The reader should note in particular that our
functions are all “Curried” (as the saying goes), so that f(x, y) really means f(x)(y).
Thus, f(x)€Dig+.), and one should take care to remark that with x fixed, f(x)( y) is
424                                                     D.S. Scott


continuous in y; whence f(x) €Dig=,) is correct. Then, with x variable, f (x) is continu-
ous in x, which gives the result.
   It is also clear, as remarked before, that application f(x) is monotonic and continu-
ous in fand in x. Therefore, any combination defines a good function. This remark, for
example, justifies the definition of S,,,:

               S28)(Ff, 9, xX) =f (x) (g(x),
in Curried form, and shows why

               S.p,€((% > (B > y)) > ((a > B) > (a> y))).
      We     have   followed    Curry    (and    others) in giving           names   only    to “combinators”
K,, and S,,,, because all others can be defined in terms of these. For example:
               L(x)=x         (the outright definition)

                      = Ky (a0)
                             () (Kua (x)
                      = Spa (Ka(aa))
                                 (Kaa) (x).
Hence,

               l= Spya(Ka(a+a))
                            (Kae),               (the indirect definition),

where B=(a—((a>a)—>«a)) and y=(«—(a—«)).                             Another example:

               C(x) (=f)
                          =I(f)(K(x)(f))
                          =$(I(K(x))(7)
                          =K(S(I)(x)(K@)(/)
                          =S(K(S(1)))(K)(x)(f),
whence

                C=S(K(S(1)))(K),
where we have left it to the reader to fill in the type subscripts. Obviously, this
“economy” has only “theoretical” importance. The proper thing to do is to introduce
a A-operator and write

                1, =AXaL Xa],
               CC. =A   fia    py AXa [fia   py(Xa)].

We shall not do so at the moment because we do not want to formulate all the rules
about free and bound variables. Our axioms are simpler if we keep to the “algebraic”
theory that has only free variables.
   So K,, and S,,, are the so-called combinators, but what is >,? Answer:                                 >, is
the        McCarthy     operator     for forming         the   conditional     expression.   Thus,   instead   of
                          A type-theoretical alternative to      ISWIM,   CUCH, OWHY                             425


> ,(p)(x)(y) we may write (informally) the more usual (p > x, y). Its properties are well
known. What might not be so well known is its use at higher types. Thus, consider the
definition

             P..(x, y)(pP)= >a(P)(x, y);
where x, yeD,. What is P,(x, y)€ Dio)? Answer: it is an ordered pair. Indeed let us
write informally

             Cx, y>=     P, (x, y);

then we see

             <x, y>(T
                    ) =x,

             <x, y>(L)=y,
which shows why <x, y> is a pair. Note, however, that this is a logical construction and
should not be confused with a data type for pairs of individuals. (By the way, one
should check that >, really is monotonic and continuous.)
   Finally, we must interpret Y,. We use the notation for Curry’s “paradoxical”
combinator, but we cannot use Curry’s definition. Why? Simple: my view is that the
type-free theory makes no sense whatsoever. This remark applies to the theory as
a whole and does not prevent me from gaining inspiration from parts of the theory.‘
The inspiration we need about Y, is the so-called fixed-point property: if fe Dia.),
then we want

             Ya(f=f(Va(f)).
Two questions: how do we know fhas a fixed point; and if it does, which one shall we
choose for Y,(f)? Answer: we are lucky in being able to choose the least fixed point
— “least” in the sense of < on D(,.,). It is constructed by iteration as follows: For
xeD,, let

             PM=HF(.--£O)
                       -.-));
                       L~+—-~Y

                        n times

where f° (x)=x. Then note

             2,< f(Q,);


  15 from the original text] The same could have been said about infinitesimals in the calculus — except
that nowadays   they    have   a reasonable   interpretation   [in nonstandard   analysis].   [comment   1993]    Of
course, once models for the type-free theory had been defined, the “paradoxical” definition could be used.
Surprisingly, it turned out that these definitions, although giving fixed points, did not always have simple
properties. See the discussion and references in Barendregt [1].
426                                                 D.S. Scott


and so

           f(Q.)< f? (Qa);
and by induction

           f"(Qa)< f"** (Qa),
because f 1s monotonic. We can thus define


           Va(N= V "(2
and then calculate by continuity:


           f(Y¥.(f))=               VV f"** (Q)=Y,Af).
                                    n=0


This proves that f has a fixed point. Now                 suppose a is any other. Then

           Q,<a,
and so

           F(Q.)< f(a =a,
whence

           f"(Q,) <a.
Thus,


           V.(f)=\V f"(Q,)<a  n=0


This proves that Y,(/) is the least fixed point.
   We must still prove that Y,(/) is monotonic and continuous in f.1° The monotonic-
ity is very easy, but the continuity requires some computation. Suppose f, < f,+1 is
a chain of functions in Dj,,,. Then

           (V.                Joo=V f(a
Let
                  [e.@)

           a=
                              Ya(fn)5
                 a=       0




   1© [from the original text] Sorry about that! When one says what one means, one must demonstrate the
correctness of one’s definitions.
                       A type-theoretical alternative to ISWIM,   CUCH, OWHY             427




          rs)
we must   show




It is obvious from monotonicity that

          a<y,(       Vf}

To complete the proof, compute:


          (Vr )ia=V fo



                           =\/ VV Sax inm(Ya(fnaxcnm))
                                n=0   m=0




                           = V/ In(Va(Sn))

                           =V         Ya(fn)

                           =a.

                                               io.@)
Hence, a is a fixed point, and so Y(\/n-0f,)<a. Thus, we have proved

          YE     D((a+4)   2):


   Having now interpreted all of our constants, we can define the important notion of
validity. Suppose X and Y are two expressions of the same type. In general, they
contain variables; hence they do not denote, as they stand, anything in particular. But,
if we assign values in the appropriate D, to each of the variables, then all of the
symbols in the expressions become meaningful and X and Y have values. Thus, under
the assignment to the variables, the atomic formula X < Y is either true or false. Now
consider an assertion ®t   ¥Y. It is said to be valid if under every assignment of values to
variables that makes all the atomic formulae of the list ® true, all the atomic formulae
of Y are true also. That is, ® “implies” Y with the variables being universally
quantified.
   Strictly speaking we have only defined validity with respect to the given domain D,.
We are more interested at the moment in those assertions that are universally valid for
all choices of D,. We shall see many examples of valid assertions in the next section.
428                                               D.S. Scott


Notice, however, how different our method is compared to the A-calculus. In the latter
theory, validity of equations (interconvertibility) is defined in a purely formal manner.
Here we have defined validity “semantically” and must discover the formal properties
of this notion. Of course in our metalanguage we are taking “on faith” the existence of
the various higher-type continuous functions in the D, that we have been defining. But
this is normal mathematics. The validity of conversions in j-calculus has no such
mathematical foundation.‘ '


3. Axiomatization

   In the first place there are some very general properties of | that would be the same
for any similar theory. We give “axioms” (quite self-evidently valid assertions) and
“rules of inference” (simple deduction methods that clearly preserve validity).

      (INCLUSION)                           OEY,             where ¥C@,

                                            OVP           @'+Y’
      (CONJUNCTION)N                         ro      en

                                            PtP    rea
      (CUT) (OR   LL
                SYLLOGISM)                     PLO

                                                     Ot V
      (SUBSTITUTION)                        DIX           EVI x)

where X and x are of the same type.
   Clearly, the rule of substitution can be generalized to simultaneous substitution for
several variables. However, this more general rule can be proved as a derived rule of
inference.
   Next the relation < enjoys several useful properties:

      (REFLEXIVITY)                  Lx<x.
      (TRANSITIVITY)                 x<y, ySZEXKz.
      (MONOTONICITY)                 x<y,      fag        f(x)<g(y).

      (EXTENSIONALITY)
                                     PL f(x)<g(x) , where x is not in ®.
                                         Prf<g
Note especially that we have stated these principles without type subscripts. This is
a very convenient trick available in the metalanguage. The point is that, say, F x <x is
valid for variables x of all types. Similarly for the axiom of transitivity with the
understanding that x, y, z are all of the same type — otherwise the formulae would not


  ‘7 [from the original text] At least to date, but I despair of ever seeing an adequate justification.
                       A type-theoretical alternative to ISWIM,   CUCH,    OWHY                         429



all be well formed. In the axiom of monotonicity and the rule of extensionality, x and
y must be of the same type, say «, and f and g must be of a type (af) for the
assertions to make sense.
   It is interesting to ask why the rule of extensionality is correct. Well, suppose
®t f(x)<g(x) is valid. Since x is a variable being assumed not to occur in any
formula of 9, it is a “free” variable in f(x) <g(x). “Free” in the strongest sense that we
are free to give it any value. Now consider ®t f<g. Give values to the variables in
@ (and to fand g) to make all the formulae of @ true. By assumption f (x)<g (x) is true
for all values of x (of the correct type!). Hence, by definition of < for functions, f<g is
true. Thus, we have shown that from the validity of            E f(x)<g(x), the validity of
®+ f<g     follows.
   By the way, remember that X = Y is short for X < Y, Y< X. Note that = is indeed
an equality relation because we can now prove, as theorems from the axioms and rules
we already have, that

           LK x=X,

           X=Y,      Y=ZLX=Z,

           X=Yt        Y=X,

           @[X/x], X=YF            @®LY/x].

The last one relies heavily on monotonicity.
    Inasmuch as we have assumed no “non-logical” constants, there is in general very
little to say about individuals of type 1 except for the “undefined” individual Q,:

  (MINIMALITY,)            - 2, <x

Later we shall be able to prove this about all the types and all the 2, — which are
defined and not primitive. If, and only in the case of individuals (and truth values), we
wanted to have the “reasonable” view of Q, and the other individuals, we might want
to assume:'®

   (DISCRETENESS,)             ©, @[2,/x,], y.<x,F @Ly,/x,].

This principle means that the only y, <x, are Q, and x, itself. This is definitely not
correct for higher types. In the case of truth values we shall not have to assume it, but
shall prove it from the properties of the conditional expression.
   The first, most trivial, property of truth values is’?

   (MINIMALITY,) - 2, <Xo-

   18 The principle was stated incorrectly in the original paper. The revision was suggested by Todd Wilson.
   19 Note here, as for type 1, we can use the particular variable x, for emphasis of the type.
430                                              D.S. Scott


Then we have for >,:*°
      (CONDITIONALITY)              | =,(7T,x, y)=x,

                                    F >,(1.x%y)=y,
                                    F >,(2,,x, y)=Q2,,           where x, y:«.

Finally, we must express the idea that T, | are the only allowed truth values:

      (EXHAUSTION)

       ®[T/xoJE YLT /x,]             PL1/x JE PEL/x,]             8[2,/x.]F ¥[Q,/xo]
                                               @-Y                                              ,

This principle allows us to argue by cases. For example, we can prove all the
well-known laws of the conditional expression by simple (but lengthy!!) arguments by
cases. Thus, they are not needed as axioms, but they must be proved as “lemmas” very
early on.
   The axioms for the combinators come directly from their definitions:

   (K-CONVERSION)              | K,¢(x, y)=x,         where x:«a, y:B.

   (S-CONVERSION)              F S,,,(4 9, x)=f (x, g(x)),
where f:(a—>(B-y)), g:(a— B), and x:a.
   Sometimes people give other complicated equations for the combinators. This
seems to be a desire to avoid using the rule of extensionality (say, in the work of
Rosser). This would seem to be important only in the situation where one wanted to
do away with variables altogether. We are not using bound variables here, but there
seems to be no reason not to have free variables. Hence, all those equations may be
proved by extensionality — just as we prove propositional truths by using the rule of
exhaustion of cases.
   Finally, we must isolate the basic facts about the fixed-point operator:

   (STATIONARINESS) F f(Y,(f))<Y,(f), where f:(a—«).
This is slightly weaker than stating an equation — but the other direction can be
proved by using the very important rule:
                        @- ¥[Q,/x]           ©, PEP f(x)/x]
   (INDUCTION)                      aE YA           «1

where the type restrictions are these: x:« and f:(a—«), and where x must not occur in
®. (We need x as a “free” variable as in the rule of extensionality.)


  ?°[from the original text] Note that we could drop all the type subscripts, and the reader could very
safely put them back in. It would   be interesting to formalize rules for the metalanguage   for doing this
automatically. [comment 1993] This was done together with a type of polymorphism by Milner in ML to
excellent effect.
                          A type-theoretical alternative to   ISWIM,   CUCH, OWHY                        431


    As a first example of the use of induction we prove the fixed-point equation: thus,

            OQ, Sf (Q4)
 is obviously provable. Further,

            X<f(x) F f(xf)<
                         (F(x)
 is provable by monotonicity. Therefore, by induction

            Yu(f)< f(Va(f)).
   As a second example, we show that the fixed point is minimal: thus,

           f(a<at           Q,<a
 is obvious. Further,

           f(a) <a,x<abf(x)<a

is easy to establish by monotonicity and transitivity. Therefore, by induction

           I(a<at           Y,(f) <a.
   Although he does not see how to prove it at the moment, the author is reasonably
certain that these two instances of induction, though useful, are not the whole story.
That is, it is not enough only to assume them as axioms; the full rule is really needed.
For example, let us define (as a suitable combination of K’s and $’s) the composition
operator B where for f:(B—>y), g:(a—B) and x:        we have as provable:

            - Bap,(f 9, x)= (g(x).
Now a mildly interesting theorem about fixed points is the following:

            B(f, J=Big,f), B(f h)=B(h,f), g(Q)<h(Q) F g(¥(f)) <h(¥(f)),
where type subscripts must be written in so that it all makes sense. The easy proof by
induction is clear. The author does not see how to prove this in any other way.?!
   Having seen how useful induction is, one may well ask: why is it valid? We shall
argue its correctness by a method that brings out some other useful points of the
theory. Note in particular this property of the pairs we defined in the last section:

           X<x', y<y’        [4    P(x, y) < P(x’, y’),
where in general @ | + ¥ is short for the two assertions        + ¥ and     ¥+ @. Hence, we
see that any list ® of formulae is such that there exists a (long) “paired” formula X < Y,
where

           ®@|1{X<Y


  1 In fact, there have been many subsequent studies of induction principles. See for example [18, 19], but
also compare the proofs in [5].
432                                              D.S. Scott


is provable.     Next    we   recall   the   property     of combinators       whereby,    if X    is any
expression and x is any variable, then there exists an expression F such that F does not
contain x and

            L F(x)=X
is provable.*” By these remarks it becomes clear that without loss of generality the
Y of the induction rule can be taken to be of the form g(x) < h(x), where g and h are
variables and their “definitions” g = G, h=H can be pushed into the ®. Thus, the rule
has the simpler looking form

            PF g(Q) <h(Q)    O,g(x) <h(&)F g(f(x))                  <h(f()
                         OF g(¥(f)) <h(¥(P))
where still x may not occur in ©.
   The validity of the conclusion of the rule is now almost self-evident: assume values
are given to the variables (except for x) so that @ is true. Then by the first assumption

            g (2) < h(Q)
is true. Then by the second assumption where x is valued as 2, we have

            g(f(2))<h(f(Q)).
Applying the second (inductive) assumption repeatedly, we find

            g(f"(2)) <h(f"(Q))
to be true. Now passing to the limit and using the continuity of g and h, we have

            g(Y(f))<h(Y(f))
true as desired.
   It is this rule of induction that I consider the main advantage of my system. As far as
I know there is nothing like it for the 4-calculus.?* Of course, the rule is very much like
McCarthy’s principle of recursion—induction (see [15]). In fact, I view my rule as being
a more general version of McCarthy’s principle, which, after we gain more experience
with it, will be even easier to apply. Note that the principle as I state it is “abstract”
and does not require any “knowledge” of the integers in its formulation. Of course,
I used ordinary integer-indexed iteration to justify the rule — but that argument was in
the metalanguage. The “formal” connection with integer induction and recursion will
be discussed in the next section.



  ?2 from the original text] The F can effectively be found from the X and can be called Ax [X] — this is
a short-hand in the metalanguage.
   *3Tfrom the original text] Morris in his thesis [17] proves a minimal fixed-point property for the
4-calculus. The proof, however, is very complicated — like the Church—Rosser theorem — and it is not quite
clear exactly what it gives one for proofs about A-expressions.
                              A type-theoretical alternative to IS WIM,     CUCH, OWHY                     433


   4. Completeness

     We have presented a language (Section 1); we have interpreted it semantica
                                                                                            lly
  (Section 2); we have written down many self-evident “axioms” and validity-
                                                                                    preserving
  rules (Section 3); now it is time to ask: How much progress have we made?
                                                                                   If we could
  only show that the axioms were complete in the sense of allowing us to
                                                                                 derive every
  valid assertion by formal proofs based on the axioms and using the rules,
                                                                                       then we
 could be very satisfied by our progress. Such completeness is impossible, however.
                                                                                           The
 argument is a standard one of showing that the class (of Godel numbers)
                                                                                       of valid
 assertions is not recursively enumerable. (The class of theorems is recursive
                                                                                 ly enumer-
 able.) Standard as the argument is, it may be instructive to see how it can
                                                                                be expressed
 in our language. We will, by the way, assume the discreteness rule throughou
                                                                                       t.
    What we shall do is to introduce four nonlogical constants 0:1,    Z:(1> 0), +1:(1> 1),
 and — 1 :(1-1) of the types indicated. We shall then write down five simple
                                                                                    equations
 involving these constants, in a list called J, such that any interpretation
                                                                                       making
     true must be isomorphic to the system of integer arithmetic. That is to say the
                                                                                        system
 where 0 is zero, Z is the monadic predicate of being equal to zero, and where
                                                                                       +1 and
 — 1 are the successor and predecessor functions. It will thus be “difficult”
                                                                                  to enumer-
 ate valid assertions of the form?4

             AI     @®,

    Now that we are moving a little away from “theory” and a little closer to
                                                                               “practice”,
 we must begin to “soften” our notation. Thus, the (—,)-notation is better
                                                                                 than the
  >-notation. We shall also use the j-notation, but keep in mind
                                                                          that Ax[X]     is
 a metalinguistic abbreviation for an expression F not involving the variable
                                                                                   x such
 that F F(x)=X        is provable — which expression is not important.2> We shall also write
 x+ 1 (with no parentheses) instead of +1(x) and similarly for x—1. We
                                                                       could even
 introduce the many excellent features of format used in Landin’s
                                                                    ISWIM — but
 remember: our variables are forever typed!?°
   The first four equations of . are very elementary:

            Z(2Q,)=Q,,


            Z(O)=T,

            0-1=Q,,
            Ax, [x,+1—1]=4Ax,[x,],

            Yoon          fosy LAX, L(Z(x,)      0,   fosn(x.-    1)+     1)]))=4x,[x,].



   ?4 Because, as is argued below, there is no recursive enumeration of all
                                                                            true equations between primitive
recursive functions.
  *° [from the original text] I could make it precise, if it were necessary.
  © [from the original text] Remember too that we have no “program
                                                                   points” nor assignment statements
— Just a “pure” functional calculus.
434                                      D.S. Scott


The last is harder to appreciate — especially with the subscripts — but all will be made
clear. (As a first step, drop the subscripts.) The first equation means that the truth
value for Q’s being zero is “undefined”. The second equation means the zero is zero;
hence, 0 4 Q because T #4 Q. We have not used ¥ as part of our “official” notation
before and we will not make it official now. What it means to say that T 4 Q is that the
assertion

            T=Q-F@,

where @ 1s arbitrary, 1s provable (and hence valid). In other words, a false equation
implies anything. The third equation means that the predecessor of zero is “unde-
fined”. The fourth equation means that

            x+1—-1=x

is true for all values of xeED, — and everyone knows what that means.
   The last equation involves a recursive definition. Indeed, let N: (1-1) stand for the
left-hand side of the equation. Then by “definition”,

            LN (x)=(Z
                   (x) 0, N(x—1)+1).
What the fifth equation is telling us is that

            N(x)=x

must hold for all x. That is telling us a lot! For one thing we will know that

            (Z(x)   0, x—1+1)=x

holds for all x. From our other equations we know that x + 1 #0 for all x 4 Q (because
O—1=QAx=x+1-1).               We also know that      040+140+1+41,         etc. (Hence
Q+1=Q by discreteness, but that is not too important.) What is new from the last
equation is that if x 40 and x £Q, then Z(x)= 1 and x—1+1=x. (Hence x—142
for x #0, x      €Q.) In particular, we see Z(x)=T iff    x=0. In other words, zero,
successor, and predecessor have all the elementary relations they should. But even
more than this is contained in the fifth equation, and that more is mathematical
induction.
   To be more precise we shall derive this rule:

            A,BEV[O/x]       S,®EP[0/x]           A, 6, PEV[x41/x]
                                 GO,
where x is not in ®. To make the derivation even more transparent, we may assume
without loss of generality that ¥ has the form

            g(x) < h(x),
where x:1 and g,h:(1—«) for a suitable «. The problem         then is to show   that the
hypotheses imply

            A,B     LF gh.
                       A type-theoretical alternative to   ISWIM,   CUCH, OWHY            435

  In view of what we have assumed in .o, it will be sufficient to prove

           A,P      Ax[g(N(x))] < Ax [h(N(x))].
 Now look at the definition of N. Note first that we can prove (by assumption)

           B,P F Ax[g(Q(x))] < Ax [h(Q(x))].
 The desired conclusion will follow by our general rule of induction if only we can
 prove

           A, ®, Ax[g(f(x))] < Ax[h(f(x))]
               AxLg((Z(x) > 0, f(x— 1) + 1) <Ax[h((Z(x) > 0, f(x— 1)             +1))].
 We can now drop the Ax’s in the conclusion, and we can argue by cases Z(x)=Q,
 Z(x)=T, Z(x)=L. Each case is easily done in view of our three assumptions. Thus,
 the proof is complete.
    That shows the deductive power of ./. The semantic import should now be clear:
 any interpretation making © true must be isomorphic to the integers. Now using the
 0,Z, +1, —1 notation it is clear that we can write down Y-definitions of any primitive
 recursive function (of any number of arguments). Consider two such definitions F and
 G. Clearly, now

          St     F=G

is valid (in all interpretations) if the functions defined by F and G in the standard
integers are equal. It is well known that one cannot enumerate the pairs of equal
primitive recursive functions; hence the class of valid assertions of our calculus cannot
 be recursively enumerable.
    Is this incompleteness result a cause for despair? I think not. The system is really
very strong. Much stronger than what logicians call primitive recursive arithmetic
because of the use of the higher types. It is more in the line of a higher-type theory of
recursive functionals proposed by Gédel and studied by him and others. Our system
                                                                                        is
more usable that Gédel’s (I won’t say “stronger” because I do not know at
                                                                                      the
moment) in view of our use of partial functions. In particular, we can define not only
primitive recursive but also general recursive functions — on the basis of .o/.
   It is enough to see how to define Kleene’s H-operator. The trick is a common one:
suppose fis a given function and we want to find the least integer x such that f(x)
                                                                                      =0
and f(y) # Q for smaller y. We define by recursion the function g such that

         g(x)=(Z(f(x))>x, g(x + 1)),
and then the desired integer is g(0). More formally

         UxXEP(x)=0]=Y¥ (Ag Ax L(Z (f(x) > x, g(x +117) 0).
436                                                D.S. Scott


   It would be interesting to have a clearer idea of what the various definable partial
functions of higher type really are — maybe the recursive functionals people already
know.?7 One particularly important question is this: suppose we fix the standard
arithmetic interpretation of 0, Z, + 1, —1. Suppose we consider a definition of a func-
tion f:(1—1). We have just shown that every general recursive function may be
defined, but conversely? Is every definable function general recursive? The answer may
be yes, but the higher types make it complicated to see.*® A possible outline of an
argument might be as follows: use an abstract machine to calculate f by symbolic
manipulation of its definition. In fact, we might even be able to use (almost directly)
Landin’s A-calculus machine. Our axioms for >, K, S, Y (and for 0, Z, +1, —1) tell us
exactly how to make conversions. If the expression for fis F, we just try reducing

             FO+141...+1)
                  \            a        y)



                        n times

until we “finally” get

              O+141--41
              \                    J)    .


                          VY


                      f(n) times

Clearly, if the reduction rules always work to produce an answer when f (n) is defined,
then fis indeed general recursive because the rules are effective.
   Note that the rules can never give a wrong answer. The big question is whether,
when we expect an answer semantically, we can always find it formally. If we could
prove that, it would be a kind of completeness of our calculus — completeness for
numerical equations — and would be the most we could hope for. It would also be
— theoretically at least — a very important result. One wonders what the situation
would be on domains other than the well-worn integers. It strikes the author as
significant that this question cannot even be asked of the J-calculus because the
A-calculus has no meaning. One has to take the reduction rules “on faith” and has no
“standards” to which they must match.
   A third question about completeness concerns the power of expression of
our language: can we define everything we want? The answer is not all that clear
because it is difficult to see just what we do want. Certainly we want what we have at



   27 They did. See, for example, the study of Hyland [11] and the brief remarks in [7].
   28 [from the original text] The proof might be contained in the thesis of Platek [20], but that is a very
difficult work to read, to say the least. [comment 1993] The document is still difficult for the author to read,
but the proof required is more simply based on the idea of “effectively given domains”. This means that
since the domains used here are all algebraic cpos with effectively enumerable bases of finite elements, the
general recursiveness of all definable functions on the integers can be proved semantically by structural
induction on the size of the definition. See [22, 10, 23] for various expositions.
                         A type-theoretical alternative to           ISWIM,   CUCH, OWHY                     437


the moment, but consider the simple truth function                            V :(0->(0-0)) given the table:




                                          Ce)      4    Le)     Ce)




Axiomatically,       V is determined by the following equations:

            - V (p, q)= V (q, D),
            EV    (p, T)=T,
            EV    (p, L)=p.
Then all the other facts about the table follow by monotonicity. (Note that this V is
indeed monotonic.) Now the question is: do we want it? Is there any reason to exclude
any monotonic truth function.
   By the way, it is an interesting exercise to prove that all monotonic truth functions
of any number of arguments can be defined in terms of V and 4, where 7 :(0—> 0) is
defined in the usual way:

            1(p)=(p>
                  1, T).
   The main      trouble     with    V   is that it is symmetric.               Thus,   consider   the function
definition:

            h(x)=((Z(f(x)) V Z(g(x))>x, x                     +1),
where I inadvertently wrote (p V q) for V (p, q). To evaluate h in terms of the given
functions f and g, we must calculate f and g in parallel. Thus, for a particular x, we
start to calculate both f(x) and g(x). If one of them gives the answer 0, we stop and are
sure that h(x)= x. If both give answers other than 0, we know h(x)=x +1. Otherwise,
h(x)=Q. Well, that is a kind of algorithm, but it has a flavor different from the usual
bread-and-butter calculations that proceed one step at a time. Do we enjoy this new
flavor enough to call it computable? Some people would say yes, but I wonder. It
seems harmless, but maybe we should think about it more.*?



  ?? [from the original text] Platek also discussed and rejected the idea in his thesis in his study of Kleene’s
work. [comment 1993] Plotkin settled all the questions asked here when the symmetric V is allowed in
[21]. As the discussion in the preface to the Kahn—Plotkin paper shows, extensive research on “sequential
functions” has still not come to complete satisfactory conclusions.
438                                                        D.S. Scott


5. Conclusions


   It seems to me that the idea of a monotonic and continuous function is a very
natural one for anyone thinking about computability.*° What I have tried here is to
                                                                                            point is
give a logical calculus (or even: algebra) for the notion using type theory. The
                                                                                           have the
that the types are natural — the higher-type functionals are useful — and they
                                                   tion.  It is   important   to remember        that
advantage of possessing a semantical interpreta
                                                                to  be kept  separated     from   the
I consider the higher-type functionals as logical notions
                                                                                       to   demon-
data types (more on this below). I think I have given enough detail here
                                                                                          — though
strate that this “algebra of computation” works very smoothly and naturally
I admit that fully formal proofs would     be very  lengthy.   (Should    we  think of    automat-
                                                                                                since
ing any proof procedure?’ ) It is not very surprising that there is a nice algebra
                                                                                       of    explicit
all we really need are the conditional expression and the possibility
                                                                                             V ? any
 definition (S and K) and of recursive definition (Y). (I ask again: do we want
                                  of computati onal   completen    ess  mentione  d in   Section      4,
 others??) There is the question
 however, and this should be given more thought.
                                                                                                     be
    Now what about other data types? My present view is that all the data should
                                                                                            type as1
 kept in type 1. In Section 4, I showed how one might structure the objects of
 the integers with the aid of 0, Z, +1, —1. Numbers are only one type of data. We
                                                                                         its own
 could imagine D, as being divided into many disjoint parts, each part with
                                                                        style   as  in   a.    For
 structure and with axioms for the structure given in the same
                                                                                                 ,
 example, one part might be LISTS (regarded as data rather than as logical constants)
                                                                                         be very
 and we would need structure such as NIL, cons, car, cdr. The axioms would
                                            the “axiomati c”   approach     over   the    “defini-
 similar to those in .. The advantage of
                                                                         in  represent   ing    the
 tional” method would be in the freedom we would allow ourselves
                                                                                                 as
 data, say, in a machine. We would only have to check that the data structure
                                                                                            is, the
 implemented satisfied the axioms. (Question: what to do about “overflow”, that
                                             Now   Hoare   (to  mention     only   one    person)
 finite character of most representations?)
                                                                                       seem that
 has already started writing down axioms for data structures, and it would
                                                                                 idea    requires
 the present theory offers a rigorous framework for this activity. The
 much more study, however.
                                                                                                  of
     Finally, we must agree that the study of 4-calculus cannot replace the study
                                                                 allows  us  to  express     many
  programming languages. It is true that the logical notation




                                                                                                                    functions for
     3° [from the original text] The recursive function people have been considering monotonic
                                                                        in  his  study   of  automata    theory    [2].    Park and
  a long time, and Beki¢ recently came across the idea again
                          the  notion   in   discussions   of the   Floyd—Man      na    proof    theory   for  programs.        It is
  Florentin also used
                                                                           theory    via    categories.  Indeed,    it  is   a “folk”
  mentioned, for example, in the Eilenberg—Wright automata
                                                                                                                 for de Bakker’s
  notion. The author became interested in it when trying to find the best induction principle
                                                                                                                  discussions on
  algebraic approach to program equivalence — and he is indebted to de Bakker for many
                     a  useful algebra.   (See  the later work   in [5].)  Of   course,   he  knew   about   Platek’s     work, but
  trying to develop
  Platek does not “seem” to discuss continuity.
     31 Milner and coworkers did in his LCF!
                        A type-theoretical alternative to ISWIM,     CUCH, OWHY                         439


computations       and that the system          could    be given the look of a programming
language, but we have not built into the theory logical notions corresponding to the
full glory of the assignment statement and to the idea of jumps and goto’s. Landin has
tried to do this with ISWIM, but the personal view of the author is that the result is
not quite successful. Landin does have a clean, regular, and powerful language, but in
a certain sense it is just another language: evaluation still must be done on a machine.
Now maybe Landin’s evaluations are easier to follow than some other methods, but
somehow I do not feel that he has given a “logical” explication of the notion of
assignment.°* My current idea is that we should take up Strachey’s plan of giving an
“axiomatic” discussion of the store and its transformations using the theory of L and
R values. The locations (addresses) and the stores would be treated as new data types.
Why? Because they have machine representations.*° Well, these ideas are still in
a state of flux, but the author hopes that the distinction between logical and data types
can help us sort out the features of a rather murky landscape.




6. Afterthought (1993)

   The historical overview presented here by the revisions to the paper has been very
brief and very, very selective. A long and tiring literature search would be required to
write a really satisfactory discussion of all major developments and influences. There
are many names that should have been mentioned. Twenty-five years is not such
a long time, but the enormous number of conference proceedings and journal
literature produced in theoretical areas of computer science and programming-
language semantics over that period make a bibliographer’s task quite daunting. Also,
each month brings several new papers from many very active centers of research. So,
I doubt whether a good history can ever be written in my lifetime. But the author is
not trying to excuse himself for not doing better!
   Rereading this paper after such an interval was a surprise for me, however. Despite
some doubtful rhetoric, the paper still makes reasonable sense, has clear definitions,
and suggests possible trends or problems that were indeed taken up with positive
results. Moreover, not all the questions raised have been settled. The paper, therefore,
served a function, and it is still worthwhile to stop to consider why.




   32 [from original text] I hope Landin will reply to this criticism, because it seems to me to be a basic
“philosophical” point that should be cleared up. [comment 1993] The author rather doubts that he did.
However, work by Milner, Plotkin, and many, many others have refined, contrasted and related “opera-
tional semantics” to “denotational semantics”.
   33 Indeed, the ideas were much developed, as shown by the books of Stoy [24] and Milne-Strachey [16].
Nevertheless, a really satisfactory mathematical theory of store and assignment is still missing.
440                                                D.S. Scott


References


 [1] H.P. Barendregt,        The Lambda   Calculus — Its Syntax    and Semantics,   Studies in Logic and the
       Foundations of Mathematics, Vol. 103 (North-Holland, Amsterdam,           Revised edition, 1984).
 [2] H. Bekic, Definable operations in general algebras, and the theory of automata and flowcharts, Tech.
       Report, IBM Laboratory, Vienna, 1969.
 [3]   C. Bohm, The CUCH as a formal and description language, in: T.B. Steel, Jr., ed., Formal Language
       Description Languages for Computer Programming, IFIP Working Conference on Formal Language
       Description Languages, Vienna 1964 (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1966) 179-197.
 [4]   A. Church, A formulation of the simple theory of types, J. Symbolic Logic 5 (1940) 56-68.
 [5] J.W. de Bakker, Mathematical Theory of Program Correctness (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
     1980).
 [6] J.W. de Bakker and D. S. Scott, A theory of programs, IBM Seminar, Vienna, August 1969, in: J.W.
       Klop et al., eds.,   J. W. de Bakker, 25 Jaar Semantiek: Liber Amicorum (CWI, Amsterdam,      1989) 1-30.
 [7] R.O. Gandy and J.M.E. Hyland, Computable and recursively countable functions of higher type, in:
       R.O. Gandy and J.M.E. Hyland, eds., Logic Colloquium 76 (North-Holland, Amsterdam, New York,
       Oxford, 1977) 407-438.
 [8] M.J. Gordon, A.J. Milner and C.P. Wadsworth, Edinburgh LCF, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
       Vol. 78 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1979).
 [9]   C.A. Gunter, Semantics of Programming Languages — Structures and Techniques (MIT Press, Cam-
       bridge, MA, 1992).
[10]   C.A. Gunter and D.S. Scott, Semantic domains, in: J. van Leeuwen, ed., Handbook of Theoretical
       Computer Science (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1990) 633-674.
[11]   J.M.E. Hyland, Recursion theory on the countable functionals, Ph.D. Thesis, Univ. of Oxford, 1975.
[12] J.M.E. Hyland, First steps in synthetic domain         theory, in: A. Carboni, M.C.     Pedicchio and G.
       Rosolini, eds., Category Theory, Proc. Como 1990, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 1488 (Springer,
       Berlin, 1990).
[13]   S.C. Kleene, Introduction to Metamathematics, The University Series in Higher Mathematics (van
       Nostrand, New York, 1952).
[14] PJ. Landin, The next 700 programming languages, Comm. ACM 9 (1966) 157-164.
[15]   J. McCarthy, A basis for    a mathematical theory of computation, in: P. Braffort and D. Hirschberg,
       eds., Computer Programming and Formal Systems (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1963) 33-70.
[16]   R. Milne and C. Strachey, A Theory of Programming Language Semantics (Chapman and Hall,
       London, 1976).
[17]   J.H. Morris, Lambda calculus models of programming languages, Ph.D. Thesis, MIT, Cambridge,
       MA, 1968.
[18]   A.M. Pitts,   A co-induction principle for recursively defined domains,   Theoret. Comput. Sci. 1994, to
       appear; available as University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory Tech. Report No. 252, April
       1992.
[19]   A.M. Pitts, Relational properties of recursively defined domains, in: Proc. 8th Ann. IEEE        Symp. of
       Logics in Computer Science, Montreal 1993 (1993).
[20]   R.A. Platek, Foundations of recursion theory, Ph.D. Thesis, Stanford Univ., 1966.
[21] G.D. Plotkin, LCF considered as a programming language, Theoret. Comput. Sci. 5 (1977) 223-257.
[22]   D.S. Scott, Lectures on a mathematical theory of computation, in: M. Broy and G. Schmidt, eds.,
       Theoretical Foundations of Programming Methodology (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1982) 145-292.
[23] M.B. Smyth, Topology, in: S. Abramsky, D.M. Gabbay and T.S.E. Maibaum, eds.,             Handbook of Logic
       in Computer Science, Vol. 1 (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1992) 641-761.
[24]   J.E. Stoy, Denotational Semantics: The Scott-Strachey Approach to Programming         Language      Theory
       (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1977).
[25] P. Taylor, The fixed point property in synthetic domain theory, in: Proc. 6th Ann. IEEE Symp. of
       Logics in Computer Science, Amsterdam      1991 (1991) 152-161.
