                                                Computer-supported Exploration of a
                                               Categorical Axiomatization of Modeloids

                                                 Lucca Tiemens1 , Dana S. Scott2 , Christoph Benzmüller3,4 , and
                                                                       Miroslav Benda5
                                                          1
                                                           Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany




arXiv:1910.12863v2 [cs.LO] 13 Jan 2020
                                                                    tiemens@campus.tu-berlin.de
                                                              2
                                                                 University of California, Berkeley, USA
                                                                        scott@andrew.cmu.edu
                                                            3
                                                                Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany
                                                     4
                                                       University of Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
                                                                     c.benzmueller@fu-berlin.de
                                                       5
                                                         Formerly at University of Washington, Seattle, USA
                                                                            miro@oasa.com



                                               Abstract. A modeloid, a certain set of partial bijections, emerges from
                                               the idea to abstract from a structure to the set of its partial automor-
                                               phisms. It comes with an operation, called the derivative, which is in-
                                               spired by Ehrenfeucht-Fraı̈ssé games. In this paper we develop a general-
                                               ization of a modeloid first to an inverse semigroup and then to an inverse
                                               category using an axiomatic approach to category theory. We then show
                                               that this formulation enables a purely algebraic view on Ehrenfeucht-
                                               Fraı̈ssé games.


                                         1   Introduction

                                         Modeloids have been introduced by M. Benda [1]. They can be seen as an ab-
                                         straction from a structure to a partial automorphism semigroup created in the
                                         attempt to study properties of structures from a different, more general angle
                                         which is independent of the language that is defining the structure. We do not
                                         follow Benda’s original formulation in terms of an equivalence relation but treat
                                         modeloids as a certain set of partial bijections. Our recent interest in them was
                                         triggered by D. Scott’s suggestion to look at the modeloidal concept from a
                                         categorical perspective. The new approach aims at establishing a framework in
                                         which the relationship between different structures of the same vocabulary can
                                         be studied by means of their partial isomorphisms. The overall project is work
                                         in progress, but as a first result we obtained a purely algebraic formulation of
                                         Ehrenfeucht-Fraı̈ssé games.
                                             Throughout the project, computer-based theorem proving is employed in or-
                                         der to demonstrate and explore the virtues of automated and interactive theorem
                                         proving in context. The software used is Isabelle/HOL [13] in the 2019 Edition.
                                         We are generally interested in conducting as many proofs of lemmas and theo-
2       L. Tiemens, D. S. Scott, C. Benzmüller and M. Benda

rems as possible by using only the sledgehammer 6 command, and to study how
far full proof automation scales in this area. Reporting on these practically mo-
tivated studies, however, will not be the focus of this paper. We only briefly
mention here how we encoded, in Isabelle/HOL, an inverse semigroup and an
inverse category, and we present a summary of our practical experience.
     Inverse semigroups (see e.g. [10] for more information) play a major role
in this paper. They serve as a bridge between modeloids and category theory.
The justification for this is given by the fact that an inverse semigroup can
be faithfully embedded into a set of partial bijections by the Wagner-Preston
representation theorem. This opens up the possibility of generalizing modeloids,
which are sets of partial bijections, to the language of inverse semigroup theory.
     Once there, we have a natural transition from an inverse semigroup to an in-
verse category (for further reference see [12]). We introduce the theory of inverse
categories by an equational axiomatization that enables computer-supported
reasoning. This serves as the basis for our formulation of a categorical modeloid.
     In each stage of generalization the derivative, a central operation in the the-
ory of modeloids, can be adapted and reformulated. This operation is about
extending the elements of a modeloid. Suppose that τ is a finite relational vo-
cabulary meaning that τ consists only of finitely many relation and/or constant
symbols. As it turns out, the derivative on a categorical modeloid on the category
of finite τ -structures is equivalent to playing an Ehrenfeucht-Fraı̈ssé game.
     This paper is organized in the following way. In section 2 we define both mod-
eloids and the derivative operation. We then turn to inverse semigroups in section
3 and develop the axiomatization of a modeloid in inverse semigroup language.
Section 4 shows how to represent a category in Isabelle/HOL and defines the cat-
egorical modeloid. After the derivative operation is established in this context,
we give an introduction to Ehrenfeucht-Fraı̈ssé games in Section 5 and present
the close connection between the categorical derivative and Ehrenfeucht-Fraı̈ssé
games. Proofs for the stated theorems, propositions and lemmas are presented in
the extended preprint [16] of this paper (cf. also [15]); the Isabelle/HOL source
files are available online.7

2    Modeloids
Let us first recall the definitions of a partial bijection and of partial composition.
Definition 1 (Partial bijection and partial composition). A partial bijec-
tion f : X → Y is a partial injective function. The inverse of f , also a partial
bijection and denoted by f −1 , is given by the preimage of the elements in the
codomain of f : f −1 (y) = f −1 ({y}), ∀y ∈ cod(f ).
6
  Sledgehammer [3] is linking interactive proof development in Isabelle/HOL with
  anonymous calls to various integrated automated theorem proving systems. Among
  others, the tool converts the higher-order problems given to it into first-order repre-
  sentations for the integrated provers, it calls them and analyses their responses, and
  it tries to identify minimal sets of dependencies for the theorems it proves this way.
7
  See http://christoph-benzmueller.de/papers/RAMICSadditionalMaterial.zip.
                                       Categorical Axiomatization of Modeloids              3

    The composition between two partial functions f : X → Y and g : Y → Z is
defined only on f −1 (dom(g) ∩ cod(f )). Then the partial composition

                (g ◦ f )(x) = g(f (x)),     ∀x ∈ f −1 (dom(g) ∩ cod(f ))

is well-defined.
   Furthermore, let Σ be a finite non-empty set. We then define

                   F (Σ) := {f : Σ → Σ | f is a partial bijection}                      (1)

as the set of all partial bijections on Σ.
Definition 2 (Modeloid [1]). Let M ⊆ F (Σ). M is called a modeloid on Σ
if, and only if, it satisfies the following axioms:
1. Closure of composition: f, g ∈ M ⇒ f ◦ g ∈ M
2. Closure of taking inverses: f ∈ M ⇒ f −1 ∈ M
3. Inclusion property: f ∈ M and A ⊂ dom(f ) implies f |A ∈ M
4. Identity: idΣ ∈ M
   As such, a modeloid is a set of partial bijections which is closed under com-
position and taking inverses, which has the identity on Σ as a member, and
which satisfies the inclusion property. The inclusion property can be seen as a
downward closure in regards of function restriction.
   In order to further illustrate the definition, we present a motivating example
from model theory.
Example 1. Let S = (A, R1 , ...) be a finite relational structure. The set M of all
partial isomorphisms on S forms a modeloid.
The name modeloid originates from the above example since S is also called a
model. For further motivation, background information and details on modeloids,
we refer to Benda’s paper [1]; a nice example in there is the construction of a
Scott Sentence presented through modeloidal glasses [1, p. 82]. We, on the other
hand, turn to the core concept of the derivative which is defined in the following
way. For convenience we represent a partial bijection as a set of tuples.
Definition 3 (Derivative). Let M be a modeloid on Σ. Then the derivative
D(M ) ⊆ F (Σ) is defined by

  {(x1 , y1 ), .., (xn , yn )} ∈ D(M ) :⇔
                ∀a ∈ Σ ∃b ∈ Σ : {(x1 , y1 ), .., (xn , yn ), (a, b)} ∈ M ∧
                                 ∀a ∈ Σ ∃b ∈ Σ : {(x1 , y1 ), .., (xn , yn ), (b, a)} ∈ M

   A derivative D(M ) is thus a set which only contains partial bijections that
can be extended by an arbitrary element from Σ and which then still belong
to M . This extension can take place either in the domain or in the range of
the function. The next two results [1, Prop 2.3] provide some insight into why
modeloids and the derivative operation are in harmony.
4        L. Tiemens, D. S. Scott, C. Benzmüller and M. Benda

Lemma 1. Let M be a modeloid on Σ and D(M ) the derivative. Then we have
that D(M ) ⊆ M .
Proposition 1. If M is a modeloid then so is D(M ).
    The importance of these results is essentially due to the fact that they enable
us to apply the derivative repeatedly.

3      Inverse Semigroups and Modeloids
In this section we show how the Wagner-Preston representation theorem justifies
our generalization of a modeloid to inverse semigroup language. We also discuss
how well proof automation performs in the context of inverse semigroups. Some
familiarity with the Isabelle/HOL proof assistant [13,3] is assumed.

3.1     Inverse Semigroups in Isabelle/HOL
We start with the equational definition of an inverse semigroup.
Definition 4 (Inverse semigroup [6]). Let S be a set equipped with the binary
operation ∗ : S × S → S and the unary operation a 7→ a−1 . (S,−1 , ∗) is called
an inverse semigroup if, and only if, it satisfies the axioms
1. (x ∗ y) ∗ z = x ∗ (y ∗ z) for all x, y, z ∈ S,
2. x ∗ x−1 ∗ x = x for all x ∈ S,
3. (x−1 )−1 = x for all x ∈ S and
4. x ∗ x−1 ∗ y ∗ y −1 = y ∗ y −1 ∗ x ∗ x−1 for all x, y ∈ S
   An inverse in semigroup theory is a generalization of the known group the-
oretical definition. This generalized definition does not depend on a specified
unique neutral element. Intuitively, it can be thought of as the inverse map of a
partial bijection.
Definition 5 (Inverse). Let (S, ∗) be a semigroup and x ∈ S. Then y ∈ S is
called an inverse of x if, and only if, x ∗ y ∗ x = x and y ∗ x ∗ y = y.
      We encode an inverse semigroup as follows in Isabelle/HOL.
                                   Categorical Axiomatization of Modeloids       5

    The domain for individuals is chosen to be 0 a, which is a type variable. This
means we have encoded a polymorphic version of inverse semigroups.
    Using this implementation almost all results needed for proving the Wagner-
Preston representation theorem, which we will discuss shortly, can be found by
automated theorem proving. Occasionally, however, some additional lemmas to
the ones usually presented in a textbook (e.g. [10]) are needed. By automated
theorem proving we here mean the use of sledgehammer [3] for finding the proofs
of the given statements without any further interaction. Regarding equivalent
definitions of an inverse semigroup, we were able to automate the proofs of the
following theorem (except for 2. ⇒ 1., which is due to a Skolemization issue).
Theorem 1 ([10]). Let (S, ∗) be a semigroup. Then the following are equivalent:
1. There is −1 : S → S such that (S,−1 , ∗) is an inverse semigroup.
2. Every element of S has a unique inverse.
3. Every element of S is regular, meaning ∀x ∈ S ∃y ∈ S : x ∗ y ∗ x = x, and
   idempotents in S commute.
    Our experiments confirm that automated theorem proving (and also model
finding) can well support the exploration of an axiomatic theory as presented.
However, the intellectual effort needed to model and formulate the presented
mathematics in the first place is of course still crucial, and a great deal of work
has gone into this intuitive aspect of the development process. A more tech-
nical challenge also is to find suitable intermediate steps that can be proven
automatically by sledgehammer.

3.2   Modeloid as Inverse Semigroup
We now show that every modeloid M ⊆ F (Σ) under partial composition is an
inverse semigroup. We make use of Theorem 1 by using the third characteriza-
tion. For this task regard (M, ◦) as a semigroup. This is clear since composition
of partial functions is associative. Since the partial identities of M are exactly
the idempotent elements in (M, ◦), commutativity is ensured by referring to the
next proposition. Furthermore, also by using the next proposition, the closure
of taking inverses required by a modeloid implies regularity for all elements in
M . Hence, (M,−1 , ◦) is an inverse semigroup.
Proposition 2 ([10]). Let f : X → Y be a partial bijection.
1. For a partial bijection g : Y → X, the equations f = f gf and g = gf g hold
   if, and only if, g = f −1
2. 1A 1B = 1A∩B = 1B 1A for all partial identities 1A and 1B where A, B ⊆ X
    Not only is every modeloid an inverse semigroup, but by the Wagner-Preston
representation theorem also every inverse semigroup can be faithfully embedded
into F (Σ), which is itself a modeloid. This motivates the idea of formulating the
axioms for a modeloid in inverse semigroup language. Our aim is to restate the
derivative operation in this context. In order to achieve this, we shall translate
the axioms from Definition 2, examining them one by one.
6      L. Tiemens, D. S. Scott, C. Benzmüller and M. Benda

1. Closure of Composition: Because of the embedding, the composition of par-
   tial functions will simply be the ∗-operation in an inverse semigroup.
2. Closure of taking inverses: By Theorem 1 an inverse semigroup is such that
   the inverse exists for every element and is unique, hence resembling the
   inverses of partial functions and in particular the closure property.
3. The inclusion property: Here it is not immediately apparent how this can be
   expressed within an inverse semigroup. We shall see that the natural partial
   order is capable of doing that.
4. The identity on Σ: The identity is a certain idempotent element in an inverse
   semigroup. It will lead us to the notion of an inverse monoid.

    It is Axiom 3 that we focus our attention on next. We define the natural
partial order and present the Wagner-Preston representation theorem, which
establishes a connection to function restriction in F (Σ). We introduce notation
for such a restriction. For two partial functions f, g we write g ⊆ f to say that
dom(g) ⊆ dom(f ) and ∀x ∈ dom(g) : g(x) = f (x).

Definition 6 (Natural partial order). Let Σ = (Σ,−1 , ∗) be an inverse semi-
group and s, t ∈ Σ. Then we define for some idempotent e ∈ Σ

                               s ≤ t :⇔ s = t ∗ e.

Theorem 2 (Wagner-Preston representation theorem [10]). Let Σ =
(Σ,−1 , ∗) be an inverse semigroup. Then there is an injective homomorphism
Ω : Σ → F (Σ), such that for a, b ∈ Σ we have a ≤ b ⇐⇒ Ω(a) ⊆ Ω(b).

    From this theorem it is clear what we mean by a faithful embedding of an in-
verse semigroup into the set of partial bijections F (Σ). Faithfulness corresponds
to the fact that the natural partial order in light of the representation theorem
is equivalent to the partial order which function restriction defines. This nicely
opens up the possibility to capture the essence of the inclusion property from
Definition 2 by the natural partial order. Let M ⊂ S, where S is an inverse
semigroup. Then the inclusion property can be stated as

                       ∀f ∈ M ∀g ∈ S : g ≤ f =⇒ g ∈ M.                        (2)

    By setting S = F (Σ), the dependency of M on F (Σ) can be seen explicitly.
In the abstract formulation of a modeloid we will keep this subset property. It
is immediate that a modeloid, seen as an inverse semigroup, fulfills (2) by the
following proposition.

Proposition 3. Let M be a modeloid on Σ. Then, for f, g ∈ M , we have

                                g ≤ f ⇐⇒ g ⊆ f

    In a modeloid M the inclusion property implies that the empty partial bi-
jection, which we denote by 0, is also included in M . As a result we want to
establish a similar behavior in the generalized modeloid. The deeper reason for
                                   Categorical Axiomatization of Modeloids        7

this is found in the definition of the derivative operation, because it requires the
notion of an atom, which can only be defined if a zero element is present. Seeing
M as an inverse semigroup, 0 is an idempotent element for which the following
property holds: ∀x ∈ M : 0 ∗ x = 0. Hence, we will call the idempotent with this
property the zero element. When defining a modeloid in semigroup language we
require the zero element to be part of it.
    Turning to Axiom 4, which is idΣ ∈ M , we examine which element of an
inverse semigroup S is most suitable for this task. To evaluate, we again look
at the modeloid M as an inverse semigroup. In this semigroup, idΣ will be an
idempotent e satisfying ∀x ∈ M : e∗x = x. Such an element is known as a neutral
element in the context of group theory. We require for the inverse semigroup,
which we eventually call a modeloid, that e is part of it. What we get is known
as an inverse monoid in the literature.
Remark 1. Given an inverse monoid, denoted by S 1 , and the element e with
e∗x = x, ∀x ∈ S 1 . Consider the representation theorem again: this theorem is not
guaranteeing uniqueness of the embedding, and in fact there can be several ones.
Hence, we cannot assume that e will be mapped to the identity idΣ . However, for
all idempotent f ∈ S 1 we have that f ≤ e because f = e ∗ f by the assumption
about e. Hence, e is always the upper bound of all idempotents in S 1 .
    We have prepared everything needed for defining a modeloid again. We shall
call it a semimodeloid. Note, as mentioned before, that a modeloid is a subset of
F (Σ) for some non-empty set Σ and, as discussed, we keep this subset property
to state the inclusion axiom.
Definition 7 (Semimodeloid). Let S 1 = (Σ, −1 , ∗, e, 0) be an inverse monoid.
Then M ⊆ Σ is called a semimodeloid if, and only if,
1. ∀x, y ∈ M : (x ∗ y) ∈ M
2. ∀x ∈ M : x−1 ∈ M
3. ∀x ∈ M ∀y ∈ S 1 : y ≤ x ⇒ y ∈ M
4. e ∈ M
Remark 2. A semimodeloid is again an inverse monoid with the zero element.
Proposition 4. Every semimodeloid can be faithfully embedded into a modeloid.
Furthermore, by the considerations above, every modeloid is a semimodeloid.
    Now we develop the derivative operation in the setting of a semimodeloid.
Consider again Definition 3 in which we have introduced the derivative operation.
It is evident that the elements of Σ are of crucial importance. Furthermore, we
are required to be able to extend the domain of a function by one element at
a time. This poses a challenge because in an inverse monoid this information is
not directly accessible. But as we shall see, it is possible to obtain.
    First we characterize the elements of Σ. Therefore, consider F (Σ) and realize
that all the singleton-identities id{a} , for a ∈ Σ, are in natural bijection to the
elements of Σ. The special property of such a singleton-identity is
                  ∀f ∈ F (Σ) : f ⊆ id{a} ⇒ (f = id{a} ∨ f = 0)                  (3)
8        L. Tiemens, D. S. Scott, C. Benzmüller and M. Benda

since dom(id{a} ) = {a}. Seeing F (Σ) as an inverse monoid with zero element
leads to the following definition.
Definition 8 (Atom). Let S 1 be an inverse monoid with zero element 0. Then
a non-zero element x ∈ S 1 is an atom if, and only if,

                        ∀f ∈ S 1 : f ≤ x ⇒ (f = x ∨ f = 0)

Our plan is to use the notion of an atom to define the derivative. The next lemma
justifies this usage.
Lemma 2. The idempotent atoms in F (Σ) are exactly the singleton-identities.
   This suffices to define the derivative for semimodeloids. We then ensure that
the definition matches Definition 3 if the semimodeloid is on F (Σ).
Definition 9 (Derivative—semimodeloid). Let M be a semimodeloid on the
inverse monoid S 1 with zero element 0. We define the derivative D(M ) of M as

    D(M ) := {f ∈ M | ∀ idempotent atoms a ∈ S 1 ∃x ∈ M : (f ≤ x ∧ a ≤ x−1 x) ∧
                     ∀ idempotent atoms b ∈ S 1 ∃y ∈ M : (f ≤ y ∧ b ≤ yy −1 )}

If we think about x in the above definition as a partial bijection, then x−1 x is
the identity on the domain of x and, hence, the condition a ≤ x−1 x expresses
that a is in the domain of x. Similarly b ≤ yy −1 states that b is in the range of
y.
Proposition 5. The derivative on a modeloid M produces the same result as
the semimodeloidal derivative on M .


4     Categorical Axiomatization of a Modeloid
We use an axiomatic approach to category theory based on free logic [14,8,9]. As
demonstrated by Benzmüller and Scott [2], this approach enables the encoding of
category theory in Isabelle/HOL. Their encoding work is extended below to cover
also inverse categories. Subsequently we formalize modeloids and derivatives in
this setting.

4.1    Category Theory in Isabelle/HOL
When looking at the definition of a category C, one can realize that the objects
A, B, C, .. are in natural bijection with the identity morphisms 1A , 1B , 1C , ... be-
cause those are unique. This enables a characterization of a category just by its
morphisms and their compositions, which is used to establish a formal axioma-
tization. However, in this axiomatic approach we are faced with the challenge of
partiality, because the composition between two morphisms f, g ∈ C is defined
if, and only if,
                                  dom(g) = cod(f ).                                 (4)
                                  Categorical Axiomatization of Modeloids       9

As a result composition is a partial operation.
    An elegant way to deal with this issue is by changing the underlying logic
to free logic. In free logic an explicit notion of existence is introduced for the
objects in the domain that we quantify over. In our case the domain consists of
the morphisms of a category. The idea now is to define the composition total,
that is, any two morphisms can always be composed, but only those composi-
tions “exist” that satisfy (4). Because we can distinguish between existing and
non-existing morphisms, we are able to formulate statements that take only ex-
isting morphisms into account. In this paper we want to work with a unique
non-existing morphism which will be denoted by ?. Hence a composition of mor-
phisms, that does not satisfy (4), will result in ?. We refer to Benzmüller and
Scott [2] for more information on the encoding of free logic in Isabelle/HOL.
    Based upon this groundwork, a category in Isabelle/HOL is defined as follows.




   For convenience, we will assume a category to be small for the rest of this
paper. As a result, a category for us has only a set of morphisms which satisfies
the above axiom schema. This allows us to use notation from set theory. We
write (m : X → Y ) ∈ C to mean that m is a morphism from the category C. In
addition, it says that dom(m) ∼ = X and cod(m) ∼  = Y , so X is the domain of m
10        L. Tiemens, D. S. Scott, C. Benzmüller and M. Benda

and Y the codomain. The identity morphisms X and Y , which are representing
objects in the usual sense, are characterized by the property that X ∼= dom(X) ∼ =
cod(X), respectively for Y . Hence every c ∈ C satisfying c = dom(c) or c ∼
                                                                 ∼               =
cod(c) is representing an object, and we refer to such a morphism as an object.
    We want a categorical generalization of an inverse semigroup, so let’s turn to
the question of how to introduce generalized inverses to a category. In the above
setting we found that by adding the axioms of an inverse semigroup, which are
responsible for shaping these inverses (Definition 4, Axioms 2-4), we arrive at a
notion that is equivalent to the usual definition of an inverse category. Note that
this definition is adopted to our free logic foundation by using Kleene equality,
which is denoted by ∼   =. We emphasize again that this equality between terms
states that, if either term exists, so does the other one and they are equal.

Definition 10 (Inverse category [7]). A small category C is called an inverse
category if for any morphism s : X → Y ∈ C there exists a unique morphisms
ŝ : Y → X such that s ∼
                       = s · ŝ · s and ŝ ∼
                                           = ŝ · s · ŝ.
      For the representation in Isabelle/HOL we skolemized the definition.




      Next, we see the quantifier free definition.




   The equivalence between the two formulations has been shown by interactive
theorem proving. Again, a significant number of the required subproofs could
be automated by sledgehammer. In addition, the minimality of the axioms for
the quantifier free version above was checked effectively using sledgehammer
and nitpick 8 . Inverse categories are interesting to us because of the following
proposition.

Proposition 6. Let C be an inverse category with exactly one object. Then C
is an inverse semigroup.
8
     nitpick [4] is a counterexample generator for higher-order logic integrated with Is-
     abelle/HOL.
                                   Categorical Axiomatization of Modeloids      11

    This allows us to generalize a semimodeloid to an inverse category by for-
mulating the new axioms in such a way that this categorical construction will
collapse to a semimodeloid under the condition of having just one object.


4.2   Categorical Axiomatization of a Modeloid

The notion of the natural partial order is also definable in an inverse category.
To state it, we first introduce a definition for idempotence.

Definition 11 (Idempotence). Let C be a small category. Then a morphism
e ∈ C is called idempotent if, and only if,

                                     e·e∼
                                        = e.

   Whenever we do not assume that both sides of the equation exist, we use
Kleene equality.

Definition 12 (Natural partial order [12]). Let C be an inverse category
and let s, t : X → Y be morphisms in C. We define

                 s ≤ t :⇔ ∃ idempotent e ∈ EndC (X) : s ∼
                                                        =t·e

where EndC (X) := {m ∈ C | m : X → X} is called an endoset.
    When defining a categorical modeloid M on an inverse category C, we will
see that for each object X in C, EndC (X) is a semimodeloid. We require the
category to have a zero element in each of its endosets in order to define an
atom. For this we simply write that C has all zero elements.

Definition 13 (Categorical modeloid). Let C be an inverse category with
all zero elements. Then a categorical modeloid M on C is such that M ⊆ C
satisfies the following axioms:

1. a, b ∈ M ⇒ a · b ∈ M
2. a ∈ M ⇒ a−1 ∈ M
3. ∀ a ∈ C ∀b ∈ M : a ≤ b ⇒ a ∈ M
4. ∀ objects X ∈ C : X ∈ M

   It is evident that this definition is close by its appearance to a semimodeloid.
However, we are now dealing with a network of semimodeloids and have thus
reached a much more expressive definition.

Proposition 7. Let C be an inverse category with all zero elements and let
M be a categorical modeloid on C. Then for each object X in M we get that
EndM (X) is a semimodeloid (on itself ).

Remark 3. Every semimodeloid can easily be seen as a categorical modeloid
by the fact that an inverse monoid with zero element is an one-object inverse
category.
12       L. Tiemens, D. S. Scott, C. Benzmüller and M. Benda

    We have formulated a generalization of a modeloid in category theory. What
is left now is to define the derivative in this context. We will need the notion of
a homset and of an atom, which we already introduced for semigroups.
Definition 14 (Homset). Let C be a small category. Then the homset between
two elements X, Y ∈ C, satisfying X ∼
                                    = dom(X) and Y ∼
                                                   = dom(Y ), is defined as
                      HomC (X, Y ) := {m ∈ C | m : X → Y }
Hence an endoset is a special case of a homset. We only assume zero elements to
be present in endosets and as a result an atom needs to be part of an endoset.
Definition 15 (Atom). Let C be an inverse category with all zero elements.
Then an element a ∈ EndC (X), for some object X ∈ C, is an atom if, and only
if, the existence of a implies that a is not the zero element and
             ∀e ∈ EndC (X) : e ≤ a implies that e ∼=a∨e∼   = 0End (X) .
                                                                  C

     This concludes the preliminaries for defining the derivative on a homset.
Definition 16 (Derivative—homset). Let C be an inverse category with all
zero elements and let M be a categorical modeloid on C. We define the derivative
on HomM (X, Y ) for X, Y ∈ M as D(HomM (X, Y )) := {f ∈ HomM (X, Y ) |
∀ idempotent atoms a ∈ EndM (X) ∃h ∈ HomM (X, Y ) : (f ≤ h ∧ a ≤ h−1 h) ∧
∀ idempotent atoms b ∈ EndM (Y ) ∃g ∈ HomM (X, Y ) : (f ≤ g ∧ b ≤ gg −1 )}
Remark 4. Let C be an inverse category with just one object X and a zero
element. Then C is an inverse semigroup by Proposition 6 and the derivative on
the homset D(HomC (X, X)) is equal to the semimodeloidal derivative D(C).
  Now the key property of this operation is that it produces a categorical
modeloid again if we apply it to all homsets simultaneously.
Theorem 3. Let C be an inverse category with all zero elements and let M be
a categorical modeloid on C. Then
                             [
                                 D(HomM (X, Y ))
                             X,Y ∈M

is a categorical modeloid on C.
    As a result we define this to be the derivative operation on categorical mod-
eloids.
Definition 17 (Derivative—categorical modeloid). Let C be an inverse
category with all zero elements and let M be a categorical modeloid on C. Then
we set the derivative as
                                  [
                       D(M ) :=         D(HomM (X, Y )).
                                  X,Y ∈M

     Let M be a categorical modeloid. We define
                   D0 (M ) := M and Dn+1 (M ) := D(Dn (M ))                      (5)
              m
for n ∈ N. D (M ) thus takes the derivative m-times. This notion is used in the
next section.
                                   Categorical Axiomatization of Modeloids       13

5     Algebraic Ehrenfeucht-Fraı̈ssé games
When moving from classical model theory to the finite case, some machinery
for proving inexpressibility results in first-order logic, such as the compactness
theorem, fails. However, Ehrenfeucht-Fraı̈ssé (EF) games are still applicable and,
therefore, play a central notion in finite model theory due to the possibility to
show that a property is first-order axiomatizable. For more information see [11].
    In this section we explicitly show that derivatives on categorical modeloids
generalize EF games.

5.1    Rules of EF game
To play an EF game, two finite τ -structures A and B, where τ is a finite rela-
tional vocabulary, are needed. In general EF games are not restricted to finite
structures, but for our purpose we shall only deal with this case. In order to give
an intuitive understanding we imagine two players, which we call the spoiler
and the duplicator, playing the game. The rules are quite simple. In n ∈ N
rounds the spoiler tries to show that the two given structures are not equal,
while the duplicator tries to disprove the spoiler every time. A round consists of
the following:

 – The spoiler picks either A or B and then makes a move by choosing an
   element from that structure, so a ∈ A or b ∈ B.
 – After the spoiler is done, the duplicator picks an element of the other struc-
   ture and the round ends.

    Next we define what the winning condition for each round will be. For con-
venience let P art(A, B) be the set of all partial isomorphisms from A to B.
Furthermore, given a constant symbole c from τ , we denote by cA the interpre-
tation of c in the structure A.

Definition 18 (Winning position [11]). Suppose the EF game was played for
n rounds. Then there are moves (a1 , .., an ) picked from A and moves (b1 , .., bn )
picked from B. For this to be a winning position we require that for some r ∈ N
the map
            {(a1 , b1 ), .., (an , bn ), (cA    B          A B
                                           1 , c1 ), .., (cr , cr )} ∈ P art(A, B)

where the ci are all constant symbols of τ .

    In order to win, the duplicator needs to defeat the spoiler in every possible
course of the game. We say the duplicator has an n-round winning strategy in
the Ehrenfeucht-Fraı̈ssé game on A and B [11], if the duplicator is in a winning
position after n moves regardless of what the spoiler does. This is made precise
by the back-and-forth method due to Fraı̈ssé.

Definition 19 (Back-and-forth relation [5]).
    We define a binary relation ≡m , m ∈ N, on all τ -structures by A ≡m B iff
there is a sequence (Ij ) for 0 ≤ j ≤ m such that
14     L. Tiemens, D. S. Scott, C. Benzmüller and M. Benda

 – Every Ij is a non-empty set of partial isomorphisms from A to B
 – (Forth property) ∀j < m we have ∀a ∈ A ∀f ∈ Ij+1 ∃g ∈ Ij : f ⊆ g ∧ a ∈
   dom(g)
 – (Back property) ∀j < m we have ∀b ∈ B ∀f ∈ Ij+1 ∃g ∈ Ij : f ⊆ g ∧ b ∈
   cod(g)

Hence A ≡n B means that the duplicator has a n-round winning strategy.

5.2   The derivative and Fraı̈ssé’s method
We relate the categorical derivative to Fraı̈ssé’s method which we have just seen.
In order to do this, we define a categorical modeloid on the category of finite
τ -structures, where τ is a finite relational vocabulary. For that let A and B be
two finite τ -structures. Denote by F (A, B) the set
                                   [
                                           P art(X, Y )
                            (X,Y )∈{A,B}2

and let ? 6∈ F (A, B) be an arbitrary element. Then define C := F (A, B) ∪ {?}.
    We construct two functions dom : C → C and cod : C → C such that
for a partial isomorphism f : X → Y ∈ F (A, B) we set dom(f ) = idX and
cod(f ) = idY , and for the element ? we define dom(?) = ? and cod(?) = ?.
    Next we define a binary operation · : C → C by
                        (
                          f ◦ g, if dom(f ) = cod(g) and f, g 6= ?
                 f ·g =
                          ?,      else

where ◦ denotes the composition of partial functions.

Proposition 8. D := (C, dom, cod, ·, ?,−1 ) is an inverse category where f −1
denotes the inverse of each partial isomorphism f and ?−1 = ?. The existing
elements are exactly all elements in F (A, B) and the compositions f ◦ g in case
dom(f ) = cod(g), for f, g ∈ F (A, B).

   What we have just seen provides a general procedure for creating categories
in our setting, which is founded on a free logic that is itself encoded in Is-
abelle/HOL.

Corollary 1. D := (C, dom, cod, ·, ?,−1 ) is also a categorical modeloid on itself.

Remark 5. Hence we have that every inverse category having a zero element for
each of its endosets is also a categorical modeloid and thus admits a derivative.

    At this point we are able to use the derivative on D. The final theorem draws
the concluding connection between modeloids and Fraı̈ssé’s method. We show
that in the established setting, an m-round winning strategy between A and B
is given by the sets which the derivative produces if applied m times. Note the
abuse of notation in the way we are using ≡m here.
                                     Categorical Axiomatization of Modeloids          15

Theorem 4. Let M be the categorical modeloid D. Then

            ∃h : X → Y ∈ Dm (M ) with h 6= ? ⇐⇒ X ≡m Y,              m∈N

   As a result the derivative on this modeloid is equivalent to playing an EF
game between the two structures. Hence on an arbitrary categorical modeloid
the derivative can be seen as a generalization of EF games.


6    Conclusion
In this paper we have shown how to arrive at the notion of a categorical modeloid
using axiomatic category theory. We started out with a set of partial bijections
abstracting from a structure, then we interpreted this set as an inverse semi-
group by the embedding due to the Wagner-Preston representation theorem,
and, finally, we were able to axiomatize a modeloid in an inverse category. The
key feature we employed is the natural partial order which also enabled us to
present the derivative operation in each step of abstraction. The categorical
derivative on the category of finite structures of a finite vocabulary can then be
used to play Ehrenfeucht-Fraı̈ssé games between two structures. As a result a
more abstract representation of these games is possible.
    Using our encoding of inverse categories in Isabelle/HOL, we are currently ex-
tending this encoding work to cover also categorical modeloids and their deriva-
tives. This naturally extends the framework established by Benzmüller and Scott
so far [2]. Furthermore, an investigation of the generalized Ehrenfeucht-Fraı̈ssé
games in terms of applicability has to be conducted. We believe that the notion
of a categorical modeloid will continue to play a role when connecting model
theoretical and categorical concepts.

Acknowledgment. We wish to thank the anonymous referees for their helpful com-
ments and suggestions.


References
 1. Benda, M.: Modeloids. I. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 250,
    47–90 (1979). https://doi.org/10.1090/s0002-9947-1979-0530044-4
 2. Benzmüller, C., Scott, D.S.: Automating free logic in HOL, with an ex-
    perimental application in category theory. J. Autom. Reasoning (2019).
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s10817-018-09507-7
 3. Blanchette, J.C., Böhme, S., Paulson, L.C.: Extending sledgeham-
    mer with SMT solvers. J. Autom. Reasoning 51(1), 109–128 (2013).
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s10817-013-9278-5
 4. Blanchette, J.C., Nipkow, T.: Nitpick: A counterexample generator for higher-order
    logic based on a relational model finder. In: International conference on interactive
    theorem proving. LNCS, vol. 6172, pp. 131–146. Springer (2010)
 5. Ebbinghaus, H.D., Flum, J.: Finite Model Theory. Springer Berlin Heidelberg
    (1995). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-28788-4
16      L. Tiemens, D. S. Scott, C. Benzmüller and M. Benda

 6. Howie, J.M.: Fundamentals of semigroup theory. Oxford University Press (1995)
 7. Kastl, J.: Inverse categories. Algebraische Modelle, Kategorien und Gruppoide 7,
    51–60 (1979)
 8. Lambert, K.: The definition of e! in free logic. In: Abstracts: The International
    Congress for Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science. Stanford University
    Press Stanford (1960)
 9. Lambert, K.: Free logic: Selected essays. Cambridge University Press (2002)
10. Lawson, M.V.: Inverse Semigroups. WORLD SCIENTIFIC (nov 1998).
    https://doi.org/10.1142/3645
11. Libkin, L.: Elements of finite model theory. Springer (2013)
12. Linckelmann, M.: On inverse categories and transfer in cohomology. Proceedings
    of the Edinburgh Mathematical Society 56(1), 187–210 (2012), https://doi.org/
    10.1017/s0013091512000211
13. Nipkow, T., Paulson, L.C., Wenzel, M.: Isabelle/HOL: a proof assistant for higher-
    order logic, LNCS, vol. 2283. Springer (2002)
14. Scott, D.: Existence and description in formal logic. In: Schoenman, R. (ed.) Jour-
    nal of Symbolic Logic, pp. 181–200 (1967)
15. Tiemens, L.: Computer-supported Exploration of a Categorical Axioma-
    tization of Miroslav Benda’s Modeloids. Bachelor’s thesis, Freie Univer-
    sität Berlin (2019), https://www.mi.fu-berlin.de/inf/groups/ag-ki/Theses/
    Completed-theses/Bachelor-theses/2019/Tiemens/BA-Tiemens2.pdf
16. Tiemens, L., Scott, D.S., Benzmüller, C., Benda, M.: Computer-supported ex-
    ploration of a categorical axiomatization of modeloids. ArXiv abs/1910.12863
    (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.12863
                                      Categorical Axiomatization of Modeloids           17

Appendix

This appendix provides the proofs for all claims we made in the paper. We will
go through them in the order in which they appear.


6.1   Proofs of section 2

Lemma 1. Let M be a modeloid on Σ and D(M ) the derivative. Then we have
that D(M ) ⊆ M .

Proof. We want to show x ∈ D(M ) ⇒ x ∈ M . Fix x ∈ D(M ). Next fix a ∈ Σ.
We know we can find b ∈ Σ such that x ∪ {(a, b)} ∈ M . Since M is a modeloid,
the inclusion property implies x ∈ M .

Proposition 1. If M is a modeloid then so is D(M ).

Proof. We will prove the modeloidal axioms for D(M ) in the order in which they
appear in the definition of a modeloid.
    Hence, we start with the closure of composition. Let f, g ∈ D(M ). We need
to show that for a fixed a ∈ Σ we can find b ∈ Σ such that (g ◦ f ) ∪ {(a, b)} ∈ M .
The second conjunct of the derivative follows by analogy. Therefore, fix a ∈ Σ.
We can find b1 ∈ Σ such that f ∪ {(a, b1 )} ∈ M . Then we can find b2 ∈ Σ such
that g ∪ {(b1 , b2 )} ∈ M . Because M is closed under the composition, it follows
that (g ∪ {(b1 , b2 )}) ◦ (f ∪ {(a, b1 )}) = (g ◦ f ) ∪ {(a, b2 )} ∈ M . As a result, D(M )
is closed under composition.
    Up next is the closure of taking inverses. Let f ∈ D(M ) and fix a ∈ Σ.
Because of the second conjunct of the derivative, we get that for some b ∈ Σ
the statement x ∪ {(b, a)} ∈ M holds. Since M is a modeloid, this implies that
x−1 ∪ {(a, b)} ∈ M . By analogy we also get ∀a ∈ Σ∃b ∈ Σ : x−1 ∪ {(b, a)} ∈ M .
Thus x−1 ∈ D(M ).
    The inclusion property is evident. Fix f ∈ D(M ) and a g satisfying g ⊆ f .

                          ∀a ∈ Σ∃b ∈ Σ : f ∪ {(a, b)} ∈ M

immediately implies

                          ∀a ∈ Σ∃b ∈ Σ : g ∪ {(a, b)} ∈ M.

Analogously we get ∀a ∈ Σ∃b ∈ Σ : g ∪ {(b, a)} ∈ M and hence g ∈ D(M ).
   The fact that idΣ ∈ D(M ) can be seen by noting ∀a ∈ Σ : idΣ ∪ {(a, a)} =
idΣ and idΣ ∈ M . This concludes the proof.


6.2   Proofs of section 3

Proposition 3. Let M be a modeloid on Σ. Then for f, g ∈ M

                                   g ≤ f ⇐⇒ g ⊆ f
18     L. Tiemens, D. S. Scott, C. Benzmüller and M. Benda

Proof. Let Σ be an alphabet and M a functional modeloid on F (Σ). We have
already established that (M, −1 , ◦) is an inverse semigroup. Fix f, g ∈ M . Sup-
posing that g ≤ f holds we know g = f ◦ e where e is an idempotent. As such e
is a partial identity in M . As a result

              dom(g) = e−1 (dom(f ) ∩ cod(e)) = dom(f ) ∩ cod(e)

and hence dom(g) ⊆ dom(f ). Furthermore, g(x) = (f ◦ e)(x) = f (x) for x ∈
dom(g). This yields g ⊆ f .
Conversely suppose that g ⊆ f . Since iddom(g) ⊆ idΣ we know that iddom(g) ∈ M .
In addition, the partial identity is idempotent. Now f ◦ iddom(g) ∈ M and g =
f ◦ iddom(g) because dom(g) = dom(f ) ∩ cod(iddom(g) ) since dom(g) ⊆ dom(f )
and g(x) = f (x) = f (iddom(g) (x)) for x ∈ dom(g). As a result g ≤ f holds.

Proposition 4. Every semimodeloid can be faithfully embedded into a modeloid.
Furthermore, by the considerations above, every modeloid is a semimodeloid.

Proof. This proposition basically summarizes the work done. By taking the mod-
eloid F (Σ), it is clear that every semimodeloid on Σ can be faithfully embed-
ded into it by the Wagner-Preston representation theorem because the inclusion
property only depends on the faithfulness of the embedding with respect to the
natural partial order. Proposition 3 establishes that every modeloid is a semi-
modeloid.

Lemma 2. The idempotent atoms in F (Σ) are exactly the singleton-identities.

Proof. Idempotent elements in F (Σ) are the partial identities. So it suffices to
show that |dom(f )| = 1 if, and only if, the idempotent f ∈ F (Σ) is an atom.
Assume f ∈ F (Σ) is an atom and idempotent. Suppose now that |dom(f )| > 1.
Then we can find a, b ∈ dom(f ) with a 6= b. But then we have that id{a} ( f and
id{a} 6= 0. This is a contradiction to f being an atom. The case |dom(f ) = 0|
implies that f = 0 but an atom is unequal to the zero element. As such that
case is also taken care of.
Conversely assume |dom(f )| = 1 for some non-zero partial identity f ∈ F (Σ).
Then g ⊆ f implies that dom(g) = ∅ ∨ dom(g) = dom(f ). If it is the first option
we have g = 0. And if it is the second we get g = f .

Proposition 5. The derivative on a modeloid M produces the same result as
the semimodeloidal derivative on M .

Proof. Let M be a functional modeloid on F (Σ) for an alphabet Σ. We want
to show that the two definitions of the derivative are equivalent in this case. We
show that for fixed f ∈ M

                        ∀a ∈ Σ ∃b ∈ Σ : f ∪ {(a, b)} ∈ M
                                       ⇐⇒
          ∀ idempotent atoms b ∈ F (Σ) ∃x ∈ M : (f ≤ x ∧ b ≤ x−1 x)
                                   Categorical Axiomatization of Modeloids      19

because the second part of the definition of the derivative follows by analogy.
   To start remember the natural bijection

               Ψ : Σ ≃ {p ∈ F (Σ) | p an atom and idempotent }.

Suppose the upper formula holds. Fix a ∈ Σ. Then setting x := f ∪ {(a, b)}
yields that f ≤ x by proposition 3. Furthermore, a ∈ dom(x) = dom(x−1 x). But
then Ψ (a) ≤ x−1 x. Hence we get that ∃x ∈ M : (f ≤ x ∧ Ψ (a) ≤ x−1 x). But
now we can quantify over {p ∈ F (Σ) | p an atom and idempotent } instead of Σ
which yields the desired result.
Conversely suppose the bottom formula holds. Then fix an idempotent atom
b ∈ F (Σ) and let by assumption x be the element with f ≤ x ∧ b ≤ x−1 x.
It holds that x|dom(f )∪Ψ −1 ({b}) ∈ M because of the inclusion property. But this
already yields that
                         f ∪ {(Ψ −1 (b), x(Ψ −1 (b)))} ∈ M.
Quantifying over Σ instead of {p ∈ F (Σ) | p an atom and idempotent } con-
cludes the proof.

6.3   Proofs of section 4
Proposition 7. Let C be an inverse category with all zero elements and M be a
categorical modeloid on C. Then for each object X in M we get that EndM (X)
is a semimodeloid (on itself ).
Proof. Fix an object X in M . Once we have proven that EndM (X) is an in-
verse monoid it will follow that EndM (X) is a semimodeloid. That is because
EndM (X) then is closed under composition and taking inverses. Furthermore,
the definition of the partial order defined on morphisms will simply reduce to the
natural partial order. As a result the inclusion axiom also holds. And at last we
have that X ∈ EndM (X) with the property that y · X ∼      = y for all y ∈ EndM (X)
hence giving us the neutral element required by a semimodeloid.
    Let’s now prove that EndM (X) is an inverse monoid. First we will show the
closure of the composition. For that fix two elements a, b ∈ EndM (X). We know
that dom(a) ∼  = dom(b) ∼= cod(a) ∼= cod(b) ∼ = X. We distinguish two cases. First,
we assume that X exists, so X 6= ?. Therefore, dom(a) ≃ cod(b) holds and as a
result a · b exists. Hence, we have a · b · dom(a · b) ≃ a · b. This implies

                          dom(a · b) ≃ cod(dom(a · b))                         (6)

and the existence of b · dom(a · b) from which we get dom(b) ≃ cod(dom(a · b)).
By using (6) we deduce dom(b) ≃ dom(a · b) but this holds X ≃ dom(a · b).
Similarly one obtains X ≃ cod(a · b). As a result, a · b ∈ EndM (X).
   Now assume X does not exist. This yields that a · b does not exist since
otherwise, dom(a) and cod(b) would exist which contradicts cod(b) ∼  = dom(a) ∼=
X. As a result, also dom(a · b) and cod(a · b) do not exist and therefore, X ∼ =
dom(a · b) ∼
           = cod(a · b) holds since none of the terms is existing. Hence a · b ∈
EndM (X).
20      L. Tiemens, D. S. Scott, C. Benzmüller and M. Benda

    The closure of inverses is immediate because taken an element s ∈ EndM (X),
s−1 ∈ M by assumption but dom(s−1 ) ∼     = cod(s−1 ) ∼
                                                      = X and as a result s−1 ∈
EndM (X). Now one can regard the inverse function on EndM (X) as a restriction
of (−1 ) on C. As a result the inverses are unique. Associativity follows by the
fact that the composition in M really is the composition in C restricted to M .
Above we have already taken care of the neutral element.

Theorem 3. Let C be an inverse category with all zero elements and let M be
a categorical modeloid on C. Then
                             [
                                 D(HomM (X, Y ))
                            X,Y ∈M

is a categorical modeloid on C.

Proof. Assume the assumptions formulated above. Then we define
                             [
                      H :=        D(HomM (X, Y )).
                               X,Y ∈M


We will prove (1) that all objects from C are in H, (2) the closure of taking
inverses from H, (3) the closure of the composition on H and (4) the inclusion
property hold which is

                        ∀ s ∈ C ∀t ∈ H : s ≤ t ⇒ s ∈ H.

1. Fix an object X ∈ C. Since M is a categorical modeloid, X ∈ M and,
   furthermore X ∈ EndM (X). We need to prove that X ∈ D(EndM (X)).
   So fix an idempotent atom a ∈ EndM (X). We show that X ≤ X and
   a ≤ X −1 X. Note that, since X ∼= dom(X), X is idempotent by axiom S5
   of a category. As a result X = X · X and hence X ≤ X. On the other hand
   by definition of EndM (X) we have that a ∼= a·X ∼= a · X −1 X. Because a is
   idempotent it commutes with X X and hence by definition a ≤ X −1 X. The
                                  −1

   second part of the condition posed by the derivative holds simply because
   X −1 X = XX −1 .
2. Next take an element s ∈ H. Then s ∈ D(HomM (X, Y )) for some X, Y ∈ M .
   As a result we can write s as s : X → Y . We know that s−1 : Y → X ∈
   HomM (Y, X) and want to show that s−1 : Y → X ∈ D(HomM (Y, X)).
   Fix an idempotent atom a ∈ EndM (Y ). Then, since s ∈ H, we find h ∈
   HomM (X, Y ) : s ≤ h ∧ a ≤ hh−1 . Also s−1 ≤ h−1 and h−1 ∈ HomM (Y, X).
   Because a ≤ hh−1 we know that a ≤ (h−1 )−1 h−1 . In total that yields

         ∀ idempotent atoms a ∈ EndM (Y )
                              ∃h0 ∈ HomM (Y, X) : (s−1 ≤ h0 ∧ a ≤ h0−1 h0 )

     The second condition required by the derivative follows by an analogous
     construction. Hence s−1 ∈ H.
                                   Categorical Axiomatization of Modeloids         21

3. Up now is the closure of the composition. Let s, t ∈ H. We want to show
   that t · s ∈ H. We will do this by case analysis.
   Case 1: s or t does not exist. W.l.o.g. s is non-existent. Then s = ? ∈ H and
   t · s = ? ∈ H because if t · s existed, so would t and s.
   Case 2: s and t exist but dom(t) 6≃ cod(s). This implies that there are two
   different objects in C. This means that t · s = ? ∈ C, the unique non-existing
   element. Because by definition s, t ∈ M and M is closed for composition this
   yields ? ∈ M .
   But then ? ∈ HomM (?, ?). Now we show that ? ∈ D(HomM (?, ?)). Note
   that EndM (?) = {?} and ? is idempotent. As a result ? is by default an
   atom. But because ? ≤ ? ∧ ? ≤ ??−1 we get that ? ∈ D(HomM (?, ?)) as
   desired since the second part of the derivative reduces to what we have just
   shown. As a result we have t · s ∈ H.
   Case 3: s and t exist and dom(t) ≃ cod(s). As a result the composition exists
   and we can write s as s : X → Y and t as t : Y → Z for X ≃ dom(s), Y ≃
   cod(s) and Z ≃ cod(t). As a result dom(ts) ≃ dom(s) and cod(ts) ≃ cod(t).
   As a result we want to show that t·s ∈ D(HomM (X, Z)). First we will prove

      ∀ idempotent atoms a ∈ EndM (X)
                                                                                  (7)
                             ∃h ∈ HomM (X, Z) : ((t · s) ≤ h ∧ a ≤ h−1 h).

   For that fix such an idempotent atom a ∈ EndM (X). We use the assumptions
   about s now. That yields

                      ∃f ∈ HomM (X, Y ) : s ≤ f ∧ a ≤ f −1 f.                     (8)

   The idea is now to construct something which can be thought of as applying
   f to a which will be an idempotent atom in EndM (Y, Y ). This construction
   is f a(f a)−1 .
   First note that f a(f a)−1 ≃ f aa−1 f −1 ≃ f af −1 . We get that dom(f af −1 ) ≃
   dom(f −1 ) ≃ Y and cod(f af −1 ) ≃ cod(f ) ≃ Y . As a result f af −1 ∈
   EndM (Y, Y ).
   Next we wish to show that f af −1 is an idempotent atom. For idempotence
   see that f af −1 ·f af −1 ≃ f a·af −1 ≃ f af −1 by using that from (8) a ≃ f −1 f a
   and the fact that a is idempotent.
   In order to show that f af −1 is an atom in EndM (Y, Y ), we assume c ≤
   f af −1 for c ∈ EndM (Y, Y ) and show that c ≃ f af −1 ∨ c ≃ 0 where 0 is the
   zero element of EndM (Y, Y ). So let c ≤ f af −1 . Then

                     c ≤ f af −1 ⇒ f −1 c ≤ af −1 ⇒ f −1 cf ≤ a.

   But because a is an atom by assumption it follows that f −1 cf ≃ a∨f −1 cf ≃
   0. The later implies that c ≃ 0. We prove this by contraposition.
   Suppose c 6≃ 0. c ≃ f af −1 c−1 c and hence f −1 c 6≃ 0 since otherwise c ≃ 0.
   Since c is idempotent by the fact that f af −1 is idempotent, (f −1 c)−1 ≃ cf
   and by axiom C1 of an inverse category cf 6≃ 0. But cf ≃ f af −1 cf and as
   a result f −1 cf 6≃ 0.
22      L. Tiemens, D. S. Scott, C. Benzmüller and M. Benda

     We may now assume that f −1 cf ≃ a. As a result f −1 cf is an idempotent
     atom. We wish to show now that c is an inverse of f af −1 because this will
     yield that c ≃ f af −1 by the fact that f af −1 is its own inverse and as such
     unique.
     It is immediate that

                        f af −1 · c · f af −1 ≃ f aaaf −1 ≃ f af −1 .

     Furthermore,

                                  c · f af −1 · c
                              ≃ f af −1 c · f af −1 · f af −1 c
                              ≃ f af −1 c · f af −1 c
                              ≃ f af −1 c
                              ≃ c.

     We conclude that f af −1 is indeed an atom, idempotent and an element of
     EndM (Y, Y ). We now use the assumption about t which yields

                     ∃k ∈ HomM (Y, Z) : t ≤ k ∧ f af −1 ≤ k −1 k.                (9)

     We are now in the position to say that we can find h such that (7) is satisfied.
     For this set h = kf . Because s ≤ f and t ≤ k by (8) and (9) respectively we
     have that t · s ≤ kf . Furthermore, by (9) it holds that

                                 f af −1 ≃ k −1 kf af −1
                            ⇒ f af −1 ≃ f af −1 k −1 kf af −1                   (10)
                                    −1                −1 −1           −1
                            ⇒ af         ≃ af           k     kf af             (11)
                                          −1 −1
                            ⇒ a ≃ af              k    kf a                     (12)
                                         −1 −1
                            ⇒ a≤f             k       kf                        (13)
                                         −1
                            ⇒ a≤h             h.

   10 follows by the fact that f af −1 is idempotent. 11 and 12 follow because
   a = f −1 f a. Then 13 follows because a is idempotent.
   Hence we proved (7). The second part of the derivative is proven in a similar
   way and we leave it to the reader to write down the details.
4. What is left to show is that the inclusion property holds in H. For this task
   fix a morphism s ∈ C with the property that s ≤ t for some t ∈ H. Since M
   is a categorical modeloid and also t ∈ M we know that s ∈ M . As a result
   we need to show that

                              s ∈ D(Hom(dom(t), cod(t)))

     by the fact that s ≤ t implies that the domain and codomain of s and t are
     equal.
                                    Categorical Axiomatization of Modeloids        23

      Since t ∈ H we know that

        ∀ idempotent atoms a ∈ EndM (dom(t))
                              ∃f ∈ HomM (dom(t), cod(t)) : (t ≤ f ∧ a ≤ f −1 f )

      and

        ∀ idempotent atoms b ∈ EndM (cod(t))
                              ∃k ∈ HomM (dom(t), cod(t)) : (t ≤ k ∧ b ≤ kk −1 ).

      Because s ≤ t and the fact that ≤ is a partial order we get that s ≤ f and
      s ≤ k. But this already implies that s ∈ D(Hom(dom(t), cod(t))).

6.4     Proofs of section 5
Proposition 8. D := (C, dom, cod, ·, ?,−1 ) is an inverse category where f −1
denotes the inverse of each partial isomorphism f and ?−1 = ?. The existing
elements are exactly all elements in F (A, B) and the compositions f ◦ g in case
dom(f ) = cod(g) for f, g ∈ F (A, B).

Proof. It is easy to verify that the axioms for a category hold by the constructions
of the functions. Using proposition 2 it also follows that the axioms additionally
required by an inverse category hold.

Corollary 1. D := (C, dom, cod, ·, ?,−1 ) is also a categorical modeloid on itself.

Proof. Closure of composition and taking inverses follow by the totality of · and
−1
   . The inclusion property and the requirement that all objects of C be in C
trivially hold since the modeloid is on itself.
    What is to show is that C has a zero element for each endoset EndC (X)
where X is an object of C. EndC (X) trivially includes the partial isomorphism
that is only defined on the constant symbols of τ . We denote it by 0X . To see
that this is a zero element first note that ∀p ∈ EndC (X) : 0X ⊆ p by definition
of a partial isomorphism. By the definition of partial composition it follows that

       dom(p ◦ 0x ) = 0−1                       −1
                       X (cod(0X ) ∩ dom(p)) = 0X (dom(0X )) = dom(0X ).

As a result we have that p ◦ 0X = 0X ∀p ∈ EndC (X).

Theorem 4. Let M be the categorical modeloid D. Then

            ∃h : X → Y ∈ Dm (M ) with h 6= ? ⇐⇒ X ≡m Y,          m∈N

Proof. ’⇒’: First we define X and Y to be the sets which are uniquely asso-
ciated to dom(h) and cod(h) respectively by the fact that dom(h) = idX and
cod(h) = idY . Then define Ij := Dj (M )∩P art(X, Y ) for 0 ≤ j ≤ m. We want to
prove that (Ij )0≤j≤m is a m-round winning strategy between X and Y . Because
Dm (M ) ⊆ Dm−1 (M ) ⊆ ... ⊆ D(M ) ⊆ M holds all Ij are non-empty and it
24      L. Tiemens, D. S. Scott, C. Benzmüller and M. Benda

is clear that Ij ⊆ P art(X, Y ) for 0 ≤ j ≤ m. To show the forth property fix
a ∈ X and some g ∈ Ij+1 for j < m. Then we know by the definition of Ij+1
that dom(g) = X and cod(g) = Y . Furthermore we have that

     ∀ idempotent atoms c ∈ EndM (X)∃f ∈ Hom(X, Y ) : g ≤ f ∧ c ≤ f −1 f.

Similar to proposition 3 we have that s ≤ t ⇔ s ⊆ t for s, t ∈ P art(X, Y ). Note
that EndM (X) is just P art(X, X) and HomM (X, Y ) ⊆ P art(X, Y ). Now let
0X denote the zero element of EndM (X). We have that e := 0X ∪ {(a, a)} ∈
EndM (X) is an idempotent atom. As a result there is f ∈ Hom(X, Y ) such that
e ⊆ f −1 f . But then we also have that a ∈ dom(f ) and g ⊆ f . Hence the forth
property holds. The back property follows in a similar way.
    ’⇐’: Again define X and Y to be the sets which are uniquely associated to
dom(h) and cod(h) respectively. Assume that (Ij )0≤j≤m is a m-round winning
strategy between X and Y . Note first that ∀j ∀x : x ∈ P art(X, Y ) implies that
x exists in terms of free logic. We now want to prove Ij ⊆ Dj (M ) by induction
on j. The base case is clear since I0 ⊆ M . For the induction step take j 7→ j + 1.
Fix g ∈ Ij+1 . Then by assumption

                     ∀a ∈ X ∃f ∈ Ij : g ⊆ f ∧ a ∈ dom(f ).

By the induction hypothesis it follows that f ∈ Dj (M ). It is easy to check that
the set E := {0X ∪ {(c, c)} | c ∈ X} resembles exactly all idempotent atoms in
EndM (X). Hence fix â ∈ E. By construction â = 0X ∪ {(v, v)} for some v ∈ X.
Now we know that ∃f ∈ Ij : g ⊆ f ∧ v ∈ dom(f ). This yields g ≤ f and
â ≤ f −1 f again similar to proposition 3 and by the fact that f is a partial
isomorphism and hence 0X ⊂ f −1 f . The second condition of the derivative is
shown to be true in a similar way. As a result g ∈ Dj+1 (M ).
