 Cambridge  Tracts In                   Mathematics
     and Mathematical                    Physics
                     General Editors
                  J. G. LEATHEM, M.A.
             E. T. WHITTAKER, M.A., F.R.S.




                           No. 4

                                      by
    THE                AXIOMS                    OF
PROJECTIVE                         GEOMETRY

   A.   N.     WH                      Sc.       F.R
                  IT                       D.,      .S.
                      EH
                         EA
                            D,




  Cambridge University Press Warehouse
           C. F. Clay, Manager
               London : Fetter Lane, E.G.
               Glasgow : 50, Wellington Street

                            1906
                    Prue 2s. 6d. net
            Digitized by the Internet Archive
                in 2008 with funding from
                  IVIicrosoft Corporation




http://www.archive.org/details/axiomsofprojectiOOwhituoft
Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics
    and Mathematical Physics
            General Editors
          J. G. LEATHEM, M.A.
     E. T. WHITTAKER, M.A., F.R.S.




                     /X'U.C.         /S^i-.-^



               No. 4


The Axioms of Projective Geometry.
CAMBRIDGE     UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,
              C. F. CLAY, Manager.
           EonUon: FETTER LANE, E.G.
         ©lasfloto: 50, WELLINGTON        STREET.




              ILdpjtfl: F. A. BROCKHAUS.
             ^eia gorft: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS.
    ffiombag aria (Calcutta : MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd.




                  [All rights reserved]
       THE           AXIOMS                    OF
PROJECTIVE                       GEOMETRY
                                    by




  A.    N.    WH                      Sc.D     F.R
                IT                        .,      .S.
                    EH of Trinity College.
                Fellow
                       EA
                          D,




                   Cambridge:
             at the University Press

                         1906
           Camhrfttge:
PRINTED      BY   JOHN   CLAY,   M.A.
AT   THE    ONIVERSITY      PRESS.
                             PREFACE.

"TN this tract only the outlines of the subject are dealt with.
     Accordingly I have endeavoured to avoid reasoning dependent
upon the mere wording and on the exact forms of the axioms (which
can be indefinitely varied), and have concentrated attention upon
certain questions which demand consideration however the axioms are
phrased.
    Every group of the axioms is designed to secure the deduction of
a certain group of properties. For the most part I have stated without
proof the leading immediate consequences of the various groups.
Also I have ignored most of the independence theorems, as being
dependent upon mere questions of phrasing, and have only investigated
those which appear to me to embody the essence of the subject;
though, as far as I know, no formal line can be drawn between these
two classes of theorems.
    But there is one group of deductions which cannot be ignored in
any consideration of the principles of Projective Geometry. I refer to
the theorems, by which it is proved that numerical coordinates, with
the usual properties, can be defined without the introduction of
distance as a fundamental idea. The establishment of this result
is one of the triumphs of modem mathematical thought. It has been
achieved by the development of one of the many brilliant geometrical
conceptions which we owe to the genius of von Staudt. The definitions
of distance and of congruence, and the proof of the existence of groups
of ' congruence-transformations,' are reserved for a subsequent tract
VI                            PREFACE

upon Descriptive Geometry.     But these questions are dependent upon
the previous introduction of numerical coordinates.
    For a full consideration of the various logical and philosophical
enquiries suggested by this subject, I must refer to Mr Bertrand
Russell's Principles of Mathematics. I need hardly say that the
formal references in the sequel do not exhaust the extent of my
obligations to him.
                                                      A. N. W.


      Cambridge,
          October, 1906.
                                CONTENTS.

Chapter   I. Fundamental        Considerations

    Sect. 1. Introductory                                             1
          2. Characteristics of Pure Mathematics   ....               1
           3. Definition of Greometry                                 4

Chapter   IT. Axioms of Classification

    Sect. 4. Axioms of Projective Geometry                            7
          5. The Harmonic Relation                                    8
           6. The Uniqueness of the Harmonic Conjugate   .       .    8
           7. Desargues' Theorem                                     10
           8. Fano's Axiom                                           13

Chapter   III.   Projectivity

    Sect. 9. The Projective Relation                                 16
         10. Projectivity of the Second Degree     ....              17
         11. The Fundamental Theorem                                 19
          12. Pappus' Theorem                                •   .   21

Chapter   IV. Order

   Sect. 13. Segments                                                24
         14. Axioms of Order                                         25
         15. The Concordance of Senses                               26
          16.    Wider Definition of Segments                        27
          17.    Propositions on Order                               27
          18.    Harmonic Systems                                    29
          19.    The Liiroth-Zeuthen Theorem                         30
          20. von Staudt's Continuity Proof                          33
                                   CONTENTS


Chapter   V.      Quadrangular   Involutions
    Sect. 21.     Considerations upon Involutions ....                    34
          22.     Definition of Quadrangular Involutions                  36
          23.     Special Case                                            35
          24.     Theorems on Involutions      .....                      36
          25.     Theorem equivalent to the Fundamental Theorem           39
                                                                          38
          26.     Quadrangular Transformations     ....

Chapter   VI.     Linear Numeration-Systems                               41
    Sect. 27.     Number and Geometry
          28.     Systems of Magnitudes                                   42
          29.     Positive and Negative Magnitudes                        44
                                                                          45
                                                                          44
          30.     Prosjiectivities and Magnitudes  .
          31.     Prospectivities and Axioms of Magnitude
                                                                          48
                                                                          46
          32.     Prospectivities and Order
          33.     Prospectivities and Order {continued) .
          34.     Numeration-Systems Defined                              48
          35.     Construction of an Aggregate of Points     everywhere   49
                       dense

Chapter   VII.     Coordinates                                            51

    Sect. 36. Comparison of Numeration-Systems .
          37. Assignment of Coordinates ....                              53
                                                                          52
          38. Anharmonic Eatios
          39.     Special cases                                           54
                                                                          55
          40.     Anharmonic Eatios and Numeration-Systems
          41.     Transformation of Coordinates   .                       56
          42.     Coordinates in Three Dimensions

Chapter   VIII.     Existence Theorems
   Sect. 43.      Existence Theorem of Projective Geometry        .   .  58
         44.      Independence of the Fundamental Theorem        .    .  59
         45.      Independence of the Fundamental Theorem    (continued) 60
         46.      Independence of the Fundamental Theorem    {continued) 61
         47.      Independence of the Fundamental Theorem    {continued) 61
         48.      Independence of the Fundamental Theorem    {continued) 62
                           CHAPTER          I.
                FUNDAMENTAL         CONSIDERATIONS.

    1. The present tract on Projective Geometry is designed as
a supplement to an advanced school course of Greometry. It is also
meant to serve as an introduction to a detailed study of the various
questions connected with special systems of projective axioms. In
conformity with these objects an elaborate study of one special system
of axioms is not undertaken. Such a system is given here : it serves
as an example, and also as a text, upon which is based a discussion of
the various leading ideas which have to be taken account of in any
system of Geometrical axioms. It is hoped that a student, who is
acquainted with the discussion here given, will be able at once to
recognize the relation to the subject as a whole of the various detached
memoirs upon it.
    A succeeding tract will deal upon the same plan with Descriptive
Geometry, including Ideal Points, Congruence, and Distance. None of
these topics are considered in the present tract which ends with the
introduction of numerical coordinates into Projective Geometry.

    2. Geometry, in the sense in which it is here considered, is a part
of Pure Mathematics, and like all such sciences it is composed of
Definitions, Axioms, Existence Theorems, and Deductions. Here
' Definition ' will always be used in the sense of ' Nominal Definition,'
that is, as the assignment of a short name to a lengthy complex
of ideas. Accordingly, in this sense, the definitions are no essential
part of the subject. The geometrical axioms are statements about
relations between points ; but they are not statements about particular
relations between particular points. The class of points and their
relations are not otherwise specified than by the supposition that
the axioms are true propositions when they are considered as referring
to them.
    w.                                                             1
2              CHARACTERISTICS       OF   PURE   MATHEMATICS                [CH. I

    Thus the points mentioned in the axioms are not a special
determinate class of entities ; but they are in fact any entities what-
       ever, which happen to be inter-related in such a manner, that the
axioms are true when they are considered as referring to those entities
and their inter-relations. Accordingly — since the class of points is
undetermined — the axioms are not propositions at all : they are
prepositional functions*. An axiom (in this sense) since it is not
a proposition can neither be true nor false. The Existence Theorem
for a set of axioms is the proposition that there are entities so inter-
           related, that the axioms become true propositions, when the points are
determined to be these entities and the relations between points to be
these inter-relations. An Existence Theorem may be deduced from
purely logical premises ; it is then a theorem of Pure Mathematics ; or
it may be believed as an induction from experience, it is then a
theorem of Physical Science. There is a tendency to confuse axioms
with existence theorems owing to the fact that, rightly enough,
Geometry in its elementary stages is taught as a physical science.
Some authors term the axioms 'definitions' of the undetermined
entities to which they refer. The enunciation of axioms is then said to
be the process of 'definition by postulates.' There is no objection
to this phraseology, so long as it is clearly understood that in general —
and certainly in Geometry — the axioms do not characterize one unique
class of entities (the points) ; but that many — indeed an indefinite
number — of determinations of the class of points are possible,
consistently with the truth of the axioms t.
    The Deductions are the ordinary propositions of Geometry. It is
habitual — and convenient — to enunciate these propositions in an
inaccurate abbreviated form. The true form is ' Such and such axioms
respecting points imply such and such conclusions ' ; but in practice
the protasis is always omitted. Thus instead of 'Such and such
axioms imply that the angles at the base of an isosceles triangle are
equal,' we find, 'the angles at the base of an isosceles triangle are
equal.' The deductions do not assume the existence theorem : but if
the existence theorem is untrue, the protasis in the deduction is false
whatever entities the points are determined to be. The proposition is
then true but trivial.
    But if we abandon the strictly logical point of view, the definitions —

   * Of. Russell, Principles of Matheviatics, for a complete   exposition   of this
whole question, especially § 13 and Chapter I, and § 353.
   t Cf. RuBsell, Principles of Mathematics, § 108.
2]            CHARACTERISTICS      OF   PURfi MATHEMATICS                  3

though in form they remain the mere assignment of names — are at
onc« seen to be the most important part of the subject. The act
of assigning names is in fact the act of choosing the various complex
ideas which are to be the special objects of study. The whole subject
depends upon such a choice. Furthermore, what is in truth an
alteration of the axioms and deductions may present itself in practice
as an alteration of the definitions. For example, if the axioms
involving the word 'plane' are left unaltered, while the definition
of ' plane ' is changed, the axioms are in effect altered.
    There is a gain in the economy of the material employed when the
number of undetermined fundamental classes, such as points and
straight lines, is reduced to a minimum.
    The requisites for the axioms are various. They should be simple,
in the sense that each axiom should enunciate one and only one
statement. A simple axiom is not necessarily easy to apprehend. The
total number of axioms should be few. A set of axioms must be
consistent, that is to say, it must not be possible to deduce the
contradictory of any axiom from the other axioms. According to the
logical 'Law of Contradiction,' a set of entities cannot satisfy in-
            consistent axioms. Thus the existence theorem for a set of axioms
proves their consistency. Seemingly this is the only possible method
of proof of consistency. But the only rigid proofs of existence
theorems are those which are deductions from the premises of formal
Logic. Thus there can be no formal proof of the consistency of
the logical premises themselves. This is only one instance of the
absolute distinction between the premises of Logic, which are necessary
for reasoning itself, and the axioms of various mathematical subjects,
such as Geometry or the Theory of Magnitude, which occur as
prepositional functions in the hypotheses of the deductions of these
subjects. These deductions are redeemed from triviality by the belief
in the existence theorem for the axioms in question, which is arrived at
by formal reasoning or by some vaguer method. Some mathematicians
solve the difficult problem of existence theorems by assuming the
converse relation between existence theorems and consistency, namely
that, if a set of axioms are consistent, there exists a set of entities
satisfying them. Then consistency can only be guaranteed by a direct
appeal to intuition, and by the fact that no contradiction has hitherto
been deduced from the axioms. Such a procedure in the deduction of
existence theorems seems to be founded on a rash reliance on a
particular philosophical doctrine respecting the creative activity of the
                                                                    1—2
4                     DEFINITION    OF GEOMETRY                    [CH. I

mind. But apart from its logical justification the procedure is in
practice often wise ; since simple axioms which appear to be consistent
probably are consistent, and as far as we know existence theorems can
probably be found for consistent axioms. Accordingly it is not well to
be hampered in the initial development of a new subject by the lack of
the existence theorem and of the attendant proof of consistency.
    Practically all the existence theorems of Geometry are derived from
developments of the theory of number, namely, of integral numbers, of
rational numbers, of real numbers, and of complex numbers. It
is widely believed that an inductive proof can also be derived from
Physical Science.
    A set of axioms should be independent, that is to say, the modified
set found by omitting any axiom and by adding its contradictory
should be consistent. Thus, according to what has been said above, the
proof of the independence of a set of axioms is in fact the proof of the
existence theorem for the modified set.
    It will be recognized that the really essential logical requisites
respecting the foundations of a mathematical subject are that the
axioms should be consistent, and that their existence theorem should
be proved. Also, owing to the Law of Contradiction, both requisites
are secured by the proof of the existence theorem. All the other
desiderata — important though they be — are merely logical elegancies,
and an excessive insistence on them may do harm in checking the
production of creative ideas in the subject.

    3. Geometry, in the widest sense in which it is used by modern
mathematicians, is a department of what in a certain sense may
be called the general science of classification. This general science
may be defined thus : given any class of entities K, the subclasses of
K form a new class of classes, the science of classification is the study
of sets of classes selected from this new class so as to possess certain
assigned properties. For example, in the traditional Aristotelian
branch of classification by species and genera, the selected set from the
class of subclasses of ^STare (1) to be mutually exclusive, and (2) to
exhaust K\ the subclasses of this set are the genera of K\ then each
genus is to be classified according to the above rule, the genera of the
various genera of K being called the various species of K\ and so on
for subspecies, etc. The importance of this process of classification is
obvious, and is sufficiently emphasized by writers on Logic. If the
genera are defined not as subclasses of K, but as classes with the
2, 3]                  DEFINITION    OF GEOMETRY                            5

 corresponding species for their members, i.e. as classes of classes,
 and the species as classes with the corresponding subspecies for their
 members, and so on, till the lowest tjrpe of subspecies have members of
 K for their members, we obtain a hierarchy of classes which it is
 essential to consider in dealing with the general theory of cardinal
 numbers. This fact illustrates further the importance of this traditional
 system.
     The Geometrical system of classification is yet more rich in
 intrinsic mathematical properties, and dominates all external existence.
      Geometry is the science of cross classification. The fundamental
 class K, is the class of points ; the selected set of subclasses of K
 is the class of (straight) lines. This set of subclasses is to be such
 that any two points lie on one and only one Kne, and that any line
 possesses at least three points. These properties of straight lines
represent the properties which are common to aU branches of the
science which usage terms Geometrical, when the modem Geometries
with finite numbers of points are taken account of. But no interesting
general Geometric science exists in which no other axioms are assumed.
The interest of Geometry lies entirely in the development and
comparison of its various branches. Most of the important Geometries
include, either as an undefined fundamental relation or as a relation
defined in terms of the fundamental concepts, the idea of the order of
points on a line. Now a linear sequence (or series) can be either open
or closed. A closed series returns into itself, like the points on the
circumference of a circle ; an open series does not return into itself, like
the series of integers arranged in ascending order of magnitude. The
leading division in those Geometries, which include the order of points
on lines, arises according as the straight lines are taken to be open
series, or closed series.
     A definition of a plane can be given which holds for every geometry,
namely : If A, B, C are three non-collinear points, the plane ABC is
the class of points, such as JT, which satisfies the condition that some
line through X intersects at least two of the lines BC, CA, AB, not at
J. or ^ or C. But this definition is unnecessarily clumsy in particular
Geometries, and can be replaced by more suitable special forms. Also
one or more axioms respecting the intersection of lines in planes
are required. Here again a division among Geometries is reached,
according as any two coplanar lines are, or are not, necessarily to
intersect.
   A Geometry will be called 'Projective'         if two   coplanar lines
6                     DEFINITION    OF   GEOMETRY                  [CH. I

necessarily intersect. Thus Euclidean Geometry is not projective, but
becomes so when the various entities called the points at infinity on the
various lines have been defined, and added to the other points on the
lines.
     It will be found that the appropriate kind of linear order for
a projective geometry is that of a closed series. A non-projective
Geometry will be called a Descriptive Geometry. The appropriate kind
of linear order for a descriptive geometry is that of an open series. In
Projective Geometry the subject viewed simply as a study of classifica-
       tion has great interest. Thus in the foundations of the subject
this conception is emphasized, while the introduction of 'order'
is deferred. The opposite course is taken in Descriptive Geometry
since the purely classificatory part of the subject is clumsy and
uninteresting.
                              CHAPTER             II.
                     AXIOMS       OF CLASSIFICATION.

    4. Throughout the rest of this tract we are concerned solely with
Projective Geometry. Thus, following the careful method of enuncia-
      tion of the Italian school of writers on this subject*, we take as
undefined ideas that of ' a point,' and that of ' a line t joining a point A
with a point B ' ; also the line joining A with B will be denoted by ^4 B.
Then the following axioms are to be assumed :
    I. Points form a class of entities.
    II. There is at least one point.
    III. If J. is a point, there is a point not identical with A.
    IV. and V. If A and B are distinct points, the line ^^ is a class,
and all its members are points.
    VI. If A and B are distinct points, the line AB is contained in
the line BA.
    VII. If A and B are distinct points, ^ is a member of the
line AB.
    VIII. If A and B are distinct points, the line AB possesses
at least one point distinct from A and B.
    IX. If A and B are distinct points, and C is a point, distinct
from A, lying on the line AB, then B lies on the line AC.
    X. If A and B are distinct points, and (7 is a point, distinct from
A, lying on the line AB, then the line AC is contained in the
line AB.
    XL If A and B are distinct points, there is at least one point not
lying on the line AB.
    XII. If ^, B, C are non-coUinear points, and A' is a point on BC,
distinct from B and C, and ^ is a point on CA, distinct from C and A
then the lines A A' and BB" possess a point in common.
    * Cf. I Principii delta Geometria di Posizione, by M. Fieri, Aecad. B. di Torino,
1898.
   t Note ' line ' here means the complete line and not the segment, which is
introduced later. Also 'line ' is ased in the sequel habitually for ' straight line.'
8                         HARMONIC      CONJUGATES                     [CH. II

    Definition. If A, B, G are three non-collinear points, the plane
ABC is the class of points lying on the lines joining A to the various
points on BC.
    Axioms I to XI hold in any geometry, projective or descriptive,
according to the definition of the subject ; but in descriptive geometry
they would be very inconvenient as axioms. Axiom XII is character-
      istic of projective geometry. The definition replaces the definition of
a plane given in § 3. It will be noticed that if this definition were
applied to Euclidean Geometry, which is descriptive, the line through A
parallel to J5C would be omitted from the plane ABC.              i
    It can now be proved that any two distinct plintsl in a line
determine the line, and that any three non-collinear piin^ in a plane
determine the plane ; also that a line joining two pointt iiJa plane lies
wholly in the plane, and that any two lines in a plane Atersect.

    5. The definition of harmonic conjugates, whiOT is the turning
point of the whole subject, can now be introduced. The definition* is
as follows : I) is the harmonic conjugate of B with respect to A and C,
if the four points are collinear, and if a complete quadrangle can be
found such that one pair of opposite sides intersect at A, another
pair of opposite sides at C, and the third pair of opposite sides pass
respectively through B and D.
    The notation. Harm (ABCD), will be used to mean, D is the
harmonic conjugate of B with respect to A and C.
    It can easily be proved that Harm (ABCD) implies Harm {ADCB)
and Harm (CBAD), also that, if A, B, Che any three distinct collinear
points, there is a point I) such that Harm {j^BCI)), and that in this
case I) will be distinct from A and C.
    But three other essential theorems respecting harmonic conjugates
cannot be established without further axioms. The first theorem
is, that lla,Ym(ABCB) and Harm(^^Ci>') imply the identity of
D and D' ; the ^cond theorem is, that Harm (ABCD) implies
Harm (BCD A) ; and the third theorem is, that Harm (ABCD) implies
the diversity of B and D. %

    6. Let FGHK be a quadrangle such that FG and HK pass
through A, FK and Gil through C,. GK through B, and FH through
D (cf. annexed figure).

             * Cf. V. Staudt, Geometrie der Lage, § 8, paragraph 93.
4-6]       UNIQUENESS     OF THE     HARMONIC       CONJUGATE        9

    Let F'G'H'K' be another quadrangle (not shown in the figure) with
the same property except that FH passes through D' on A C. Firstly-
let F'G'H'K' be not coplanar with FGHK, then evidently any pair of
the lines FF' , GG', KK' intersect, and so do any pair of GG' , HH',
KK'. Also no three of these lines are coplanar. Hence they intersect
in the same point. Hence FH and F'H' are coplanar, and D and D'




must each be the point in which ABC intersects this plane. Thus D
and n coincide. Secondly let the two quadrangles be coplanar. Then
considering the triangles FGK and F'G'K', the pairs of homologously
named sides intersect iu the coUinear points A, B, C. Hence, if we
assume Desargues' Theorem respecting coaxial and perspective
triangles, FF', GG', KK' are concurrent. Similarly GG', HH' and
KK' are concurrent. Hence in the triangles FGH and F'G'H',
we have FF', GG', HH' concurrent.
    Thus again using Desargues' Theorems, the pairs of homologously
named sides intersect in three collinear points. But J. and Care two
of these points. Hence D and If coincide.
    Thus the proof of the required theorem depends on Desargues'
Theorems of Perspective Triangles.
    Again the proof* that Harm {A BCD) implies Harm {BCD A) also
requires Desargues' Perspective Theorems. Also it requires the theorem
that B and D are distinct points. For (cf. annexed figure) let the
quadrangle EFGHh^ such that EF and GH are concurrent in A, and
EH and FG in C, and FH and EG pass respectively through D and B.
Let FH and EG intersect in K. Then (assuming that D and B are
distinct points) the triangles EFC and DBK are coaxial, and hence
by Desargues' Theorem ED, FB, and CK are concurrent, say in
the point L. Then the quadrangle EKFL has sides LE and FK
concurrent in D, sides LF and EK concurrent in B, the side LK
                * Cf. V. Staudt, G. d. L. % 8, paragraph 96.
10                   DESARGUES   THEOREM

through C, and the side EF through A.      Hence we find [C
                                                         Harm
                                                            H. II
{BCDA).




    7. To prove Desargues' Theorems, first let the two coplanar
triangles ABC, A'B'C be in perspective, so that AA', BB\ CC are
7]                        DESARGUES'      THEOREM                            11

concurrent in 0. Assuming that the space is at least of three
dimensions, take any point S outside the plane, and join SA, SB, SC.
Then the planes SO A, SOB, and SOC have a common line of inter-
        section SO. But in the line SO there are at least three points, and
thus there is on it a point S' distinct from ^S" and 0. Let S'A' and SA
intersect in A", S'B' and SB in B", S'C and SC in C". Let / be the
line of intersection of the plane A"B"C" with the plane ABC. Then
BC and B'C" intersect on /, and so do RC and B"C". Hence BC
and B'C intersect on /, and similarly for the other sides. Thus
perspective triangles are coaxial.
    Secondly, let the two coplanar triangles ABC, A'SC be coaxial,
so that BC and B'C intersect on the line /, and similarly for CA and
CA', and for AB and A'B . Then by hypothesis a point A' exists
outside the plane, and a point S, distinct from A and A', exists on the
line AA'. Let SB and SC intersect the plane A' I in B' and C" .
Then BC, BC, B'C" intersect on /, hence BB" and CC" are
concurrent. Thus the three lines ^'J.", BB', CO" are concurrent in
some point S' . Hence the three planes AAA", BBB', CC'C" have
the common line of intersection SS', which meets the plane ABC
in some point 0. Then A A, BB, CC are concurrent in 0.
    Accordingly Desargues' Theorems can be proved, if three (or more)
dimensions are assumed in addition to the preceding axioms.
    The requisite axiom can be worded* thus :
    Xin. \i A, B, C are any three non-coUinear points, there exists
at least one point external to the plane ABC.
    Peanot, and subsequently HilbertJ, have proved that, if the
Geometry be two dimensional, that is, if axiom XHI be excluded, the
preceding axioms together ^vith the contradictory of Desargues'
Theorem form a consistent system.
    For consider plane Euclidean Geometry, made projective by the
addition of the line at infinity, and a set of Cartesian axes, Ox and Oy.
    Consider all loci of the form
                         ny=f{y,mln)m{pe-a),
    * Cf. Fieri, loc. cit.
    t Cf. Sui fondamenti della Geometria, Rivista di Matematica, vol. rv. 1894,
p. 73.
    J Cf. Grundlagen der Geometrie, 1899. A simplified form of Hubert's proof is
given by K. Th. Vahlen, Abstrakte Geometrie, Leipzig, 1905, p. 68. The proof in
the text, which is much simpler than any of those above mentioned, was given by
R. F. Moulton, A simple non-desarguesian Plane Geometry, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc,
vol. III. 1902.
12                       DESARGUES'    THEOREM

where m, n, and a are variable parameters, each set of values character-
                                                                  [CH. II
      izing one member of the family of loci, and f{y, m/n) is the same
function for all members of the family, defined as follows :
    If                  m/n ^ 0, then /(y, m/n) = 1,
if                    m/n>0, y ^0,   then f{y, m/n) = 1,
if                m/n >0, y>0,     then /(y, m/n) = c,
where c has some definite fixed positive value, not unity.
    Call the loci of this family 'modified lines,' and include in the
family the line at infinity. Then a modified line consists of two parts,
portions of two straight lines, like the line A^^KM in the annexed




figure, or else, if m/n ^ 0, it is an ordinary straight line, for instance
PCi in the figure. A modified line may be considered as refracted at
the axis of w, when m/n is positive.
    Solving the equations
                ny = m{x- a), and niy = m^ {x - a^ ),
we find             y - mmx (aj - a)/{nm-x - n-im) ;
and solving the equations

       ny' = cm {x - a), and n-^y' - cnii {x - «]),
we find       y = cmmi (a-i - a)/{nmi - nim).
Thus y and y' are either both positive, or both negative, or both zero.
Accordingly one and only one modified line joins any two points. It
7, 8]                          FANO'S AXIOM                                    13
can therefore be easily seen that taking the points of the Euclidean
plane to be the points of axioms I — XII, and the modified lines
to be the lines of these axioms, then the axioms are all satisfied.
    But Desargues' theorem of perspective triangles is not satisfied with
this detennination of points and lines. For notice that if the parts of
two modified lines below the axis of x{y <Qi) are parallel, the parts
above the axis of x are also parallel. Now (cf. annexed figure) let
A^BiC^ and A-yB^C^ be two triangles, both below the axis of x, and with
their homologous sides parallel ; also let the triangles be so placed that
PC2.C1, PB2B1, 3IKA2A1 are the modified lines through Ci and C.2,
Bi and B^, Ai and A^. Then evidently Desargues' Theorem is not
satisfied.

    8. The theorem, that Harm (A BCD) imphes the diversity of B
and D, has been shown by Fano* not to follow from the preceding
axioms. This is proved by the consideration of a three dimensional
geometry in which there are only fifteen points. Since we are only
concerned with a finite number of entities, we can form our classes,
such as straight lines and planes, by mere enumeration of their
members. To facilitate this enumeration, choose any five of the
entities and name them a, b, c, d, e. Call these the simply-named
entities. The remaining ten entities are named {ah), (ac), . . . (de) ;
these are the doubly-named entities. Thus the fifteen points are
all named, and divided by their names into two types. Note that the
names (ab) and (ba) are not distinguished. Every straight line
contains three and only three points, and the relations between the
names of the points divide them into three types. Type I consists of
all classes such as the class composed of a, b and {ab) ; there are ten
examples of this type. Type II consists of all classes such as the class
composed of {be), {ac), {ah) ; there are ten examples of this type.
Type III consists of all classes such as the class composed of a, {be),
{de) ; there are fifteen examples of this type. Thus there are in
all 35 straight lines in this space. For example, d, e and {de)
compose a line of the first type, and {be), {cd) and {bd^ compose a line
of the second type, and e, {be), {ad) compose a line of the third type.
     Any set of three points not of one of these types defines a plane.
There are ten types of sets of three non-collinear points, which may be
defined by examples thus :

    * Sui postulati faiidamentali della Geometria projettiva, Giorn. di Matemat.,
vol. XXX. 1891 ; also cf. Fieri, loc. cit.
14                               FANOS     AXIOM

      Type Ihj a,b, c;                 Type II by a, b, (ac) ; [CH. II
      Type III by a, b, (cd) ;         Type IV by a, (ab), (ac) ;
      Type V by a, {ab\ (be) ;         Type VI by a, (ab), (cd) ;
      Type VII by {ah\ {ac), (de) ;    Type VIII by a, (be), (bd) ;
      Type IX by (ab), (ac), (ad) ;    Tyi)e X by (ab), (ac), (bd).
    There are two types of planes, each plane containing seven points
and seven straight lines. Type I contains non-collinear triple sets from
Type I to Type VII inclusive ; while Type II of planes contains non-
collinear triple sets of Types VIII, IX and X. The annexed figures
illustrate the types of planes.
                                                           m




    In these figures the named points on straight lines are points
on straight lines in the finite geometry, also the named points of
contact of the circles are collinear in the finite geometry. Now in the
example of Type I, (be) is its own harmonic conjugate with respect to
b and c ; and in the example of Type II, (dc) is its own harmonic
conjugate with respect to (ac) and (ad).
    It is evident that the projective axioms hitherto given are all
satisfied. Also the Geometry is three dimensional. For there are
seven points on any given plane : take a point outside the plane,
and join it with each of the seven points ; there is one remaining point
on each of these lines. Accordingly all the fifteen points are thus
used up.
     Hence an axiom, which we may call ' Fano's axiom,' is required.
     XIV.   If Harm (A BCD) holds, then B and I) are diverse points.
     An equivalent form * of this axiom is, the three harmonic points of
    * Cf. Fieri, Niwvi Principii di Geometria Projettiva Complessa, Trans. Accad. R.
di Torino, 1905. Note that subsequent references to Fieri refer to the other memoir
previously mentioned.
8]                AXIOM   OF THREE    DIMENSIONS                   15

a complete quadrilateral are not coUinear. The equivalence of the two
forms of the axiom is obvious from a figure.
    The axiom which limits the Geometry to three dimensions will now
be given. It is not stated by Fieri, who never requires it in his
reasonings. It will be wanted here when we come to the introduction
of coordinates.
    XV. There exists a plane a and a point A, not incident in a, such
that any point lies in some line possessing A and some point of a.
    Note that this axiom is not true for Euclidean space. For the
plane through A, parallel to a, would be omitted. The property
is enunciated for one plane and one point. It can then be shown
to hold for every plane and every point external to it. Also it can be
proved that any two planes intersect in a straight line.
                          CHAPTER             III.
                             PROJECTIVITY.


    9. (a) When two figures can be derived one from the other by a
single projection, they are said to be ' in perspective ' ; when two
figures can be derived one from the other by a finite series of perspective
transformations, they are said to be ' projectively ' related. A property
of a figure, which is necessarily also possessed by any figure projective
with it, is called a ' projective property.' The symbol
                        {ABC...)^(A'B'C'...)
will mean that the range ABC. . . is projective with the range A'B'C .. .,
A corresponding to A', etc. If a series of n perspective transformations
exists which finally transform the range ABC... into the range
A'B'C ..., the figures will be said to have a 'projective relation of the
nth degree,' and the fact will be expressed by {ABC.) Xn {A'B'C'...).
Thus {ABC...)l^n{A'B'C'...) implies {ABC... )i:: {A'B'C ...) • and
also {ABC...)~K-i{A'B'C ...) expresses that the ranges ABC... and
A'B'C... are perspectively related. Also if the vertex {U, say)
of a perspectivity is to be expressed, TTi will be replaced hy ~u-
    (/3) The above is not v. Staudt's definition* of projectivity.
According to his definition, the points on two lines (which may
be identical) are projectively related when there is a one-one correspon-
       dence between them, such that if ^, B, C, D are any four points
on one line, and A', B', C, D' are their correspondents on the other
line, then Harm {ABCD) and Harm {A' BCD') imply each other.
Let us call such a correspondence a ' Harmonically Projective ' relation
between the lines.
    (y) There are now two propositions to be considered. One
of them is the proposition that a projective correspondence between two
                    * Cf. G. d. L. § 9, paragraph 103.
9, 10]          PROJECTIVITY        OF   THE   SECOND      DEGREE                    17

lines is completely determined when the correspondents of three
distinct points on one line are determined on the other. This pro-
         position has earned itself the title of ' The fundamental proposition of
Projective Geometry.' The other proposition is, that a harmonically
projective correspondence between two lines is a projective corre-
                      spondence. Itwill be found that these propositions cannot be proved
without further axioms.
    (8) Since the quadrilateral construction is projective, it is easily
seen that it follows from our axioms that, if A, B, G, D satisfy
Harm {A BCD), the property is projective. Hence it immediately
follows that a projective correspondence between the points on two
Hues is a harmonically projective correspondence.

    10. If the axes* of the ranges ABC... and A'BC ... are distinct,
and if w is greater than 1, then (^ABC...')~K^{^A'EC' ...) implies
{ABC...)~K^{A'BC' ...)\. The proof of this theorem requires two
lemmas.

 Lemma I.          If      {ABCD...) Xi (AB"C"B"...),
and                      {AF'C"D'...)l^,{AFC'iy...),




then
                          (ABCI)...)ir,(AB'C'iy...).
   * The axis of a range of points is the straight line which possesses them all.
   t Cf. F. Schur, Ueber den FundamentaUatz der projectiven Geometrie, Math.
Annal. vol. u. 1899.
       W.
18              PROJECTIVITY       OF THE    SECOND     DEGREE             [CH. Ill


For (cf. annexed fig.) let S and >S^' be the centres of the two per-
spectivities, and let BB' intersect SS' in Si (not shown in figure).
Then by Desargues' Theorem, since BB'B" and CC'C" are in per-
            spective, the intersection of BB' and CC must be on SS', and
hence CC passes through Si. Similarly for BD', and so on.
    Lemma II. A relation of projectivity of the 2nd degree between
the lines gi and g^, namely two perspectivities from gi to g^ and from g^
to g3 respectively, can be modified by replacing ^2 by any line not
passing through the point (gigs), and not joining corresponding points
of gi and gs*.
    Let Si (cf. annexed figure) be the centre of perspectivity from gi to
^2, and >S'2 that from ^2 to ^3.      Let LMhe the line which is to replace




g-i, where by h3T)othesis L and M are distinct, and L does not
correspond to M.     Let Ai be (gig2) and B3 be (g^s). Then
                      (Pi-) m(P....) ^(Ps-).
Firstly, assume that M is not As- Project [P3...] from S2 on to AiM,
producing [P'---]. Then by Lemma I, (Pi...) Xi (P'---)- Hence
g.2 has been replaced by AiM. Now in exactly the same way, since L
and M do not correspond, by interchanging the roles of gi and ^3,
AiM can be replaced by LM. Secondly, if M coincides with A3,
by the first case replace ^2 by I'M', where L' is distinct from Ai and
M' from A3 ; and then, again by the first case, replace L'M' by LM.
     * I am indebted to Professor Veblen of Princeton for the following proof, which
differs from Schur's. It was given by him in lectures (On the Foundations of
Geometry) in the University of Chicago, 1905. Mimeographed copies of the notes
exist. I have found them to be most instructive.
                                                                             19

10, 11]             THE   FUNDAMENTAL        THEOREM

    The main theorem can now be proved. Let there be a perspective
relation from gi to ^2> from g., to g^, and from 5^3 to <7<. Through the
point (gfa, ^'4) draw any line h, so that (A, g^ does not correspond




to {gz, gt) on ga. Then by Lemma II, there are perspective relations
from gi to k and from h to g^, which give the same correspondents on g^.
Also by Lemma I the resulting projective relation ofthe 2nd degree
between h and gt can be replaced by a perspective relation. Hence the
projective relation of the 3rd degree between gi and g^ can be replaced
by one of the 2nd degree. Hence in a series of w perspective
transformations, sequences of three can continually be replaced by
sequences of two such transformations, either as above, or, in ex-
           ceptional cases (when gi, g2, gs, g^ are not aU distinct) by a use of
Lemma I, as it is easy to see.

    11. The proof of the 'Fundamental Theorem' can be reduced
to depend on Desargues' perspective theorem, and on Pascal's theorem
for the case when the conic is two straight lines (Pappus' Theorem)*.
    Let A, B, C on the line g correspond to A^, Bi, Ci on the line gi.
By ,§ 10, the projective relation can be reduced to one of the 2nd
degree, and by Lemma II of § 10 the intervening line can be chosen to
join any two non-corresponding points of p and gi. Let it join A and
Bi ; call ABi the line g'. Then (to obtain a projective relation with
the required properties) the centre of the perspectivity between g and
g can be chosen to be the point (BBi . CCi), say S ; and the centre
of that between g' and gi must then be the point (^^1 . CCi), say S^.
By this projective relation P corresponds to Pi, by the intermediary of
P" on g'.   Now if by any other projective relation P corresponds to P/
     * This was pointed out without proof by H. Wiener, cf. Jahresbericht der
DeuUchen Math. Ver. vol. 1, 1890. The proof here given is due to Schur, loc.
cit.
                                                                     2—2
20                  THE   FUNDAMENTAL     THEOREM

                                                                 [CH. Ill
on gi, project P/ on to g' from Si into the point P".     Then (ABCP)
is projective with {ABiC'P").




     Hence if we can prove that these ranges, with the self-corresponding
point A, are in perspective, then BB^, CC, PP" are concurrent ; and
thence P', P", and Pi, P/ coincide.
    To prove that two projective ranges (on lines g and ^') with a self-




corresponding point are in perspective, reduce by § 10 the projectivity
11, 12]                        pappus' theorem                                     21

to the 2nd degree, with g^ as the intervening line, and S, S' as the
centres of perspective. Then since the point (g, g) is self-corre-
          sponding, either g^ or SS' passes through {g, g'). In the first case, the
theorem follows from Lemma I of § 10. In the second case let g^ cut
g and g in C and D', and let A be {g, g), and P, Pq, P' a variable
trio of correspondents on g, g^, g respectively. Then on the two lines
CD and A8S\ consider the hexagon CS'PoSUA ; by Pascal's Theorem
for two lines the three points {CS', SU), {S'P„ UA), (P^, AC)
are coUinear; that is, the points P, P, S" are collinear, where S"
is the point (CS', SD'). Hence the projective ranges [P] and [P] are
in perspective. Conversely, if the fundamental theorem is assumed,
Pappus' Theorem holds. For the proof wiU be the weU-known
projective proof of Pascal's theorem adapted to the case when the conic
is two straight lines.

    12. The establishment of the Pappus Theorem can be investigated
as follows*.
    Let two straight lines, intersecting in 0, contain respectively the
two trios of points Ei, E3, Es, and E2, E4, Eg, all distinct and
distinct from 0. Assuming three dimensions at least, there is a point,
(12) say, not in the plane OEiEa. Also on the line E^ (12), there is at
least one other point, (23) say, distinct from E-i and (12). Now the
plane EiEi(l2) intersects the line ^3(23) in the single point (34), say.
Hence the line Et (34) intersects the coplanar line Ei (12) in the
point (14). Similarly from Ea the single line Eg (16) (26) can be drawn
intersecting Ei (12) and E3 (23) in (16) and (26). Also similarly from
Ei the single line Es (54) (25) can be drawn intersecting E-i (12) and
^4 (14) in the points (25) and (54). If now we may assume that
E5 (25) and -£'6(16) intersect in (56), we may proceed as follows. Let
I) be the point (EiE. . E^E,), E the point {E^E^ . E^^l Ethe point
(E3E4, . EJEi), also let ir be the plane OE1E.2. Also mention the other
planes by all the marked points on them.
    Thus I) lies in the planes
     TT, {i^,^, (12) (14) (16) (23) (25)}, {^,£^, (14) (34) (54) (25)}.
    Thus D is the intersection of the line (14) (25) with tt.
    Again E is the intersection of the planes

TT, {E,Es(l&)(SQ)},        {EJSs(45)(2o)},       {^,£'3(12) (23) (25) (43) (36)}.
     • Cf. Schnr, loc. cit., who refers this proof to Dandelin, Reeherches rumvellet,
etc., Annales de Gergonne, vol. xv.
22                                PAPPUS         THEOREM

                                                                  [CH. Ill
     But, from the assumption as to the existence of (56), the planes
                {^5^6 (16) (36)} and {^^^e (45) (25)}
form the single plane
                       {^,^e(16)(36)(45)(25)}.
     Thus E is the intersection of the line (25) (36) with tt.



                                        r(2,5)        /(5,4)   (56)j




                                    /(2.3) /(3,4) M^



                                  1(1.2)             -'/) /.-■■"
                                                  i(i,4     .-mL..--;
                                                                 r'!


                                            /E,                        ■■'Ik'"




                M

                            toT


     Again F is the intersection of the planes
      TT, {^^^4 (36) (34) (23) (14) (54)}, {^,^« (16) (14) (12) (36)}.
     Thus i^is the intersection of the line (14) (36) with tt.
     Accordingly i>, E, F all lie in the line
                            {tt. (14) (25) (36)}.
Thus the Pappus Theorem is established.
    Conversely, if Pappus' Theorem is assumed, the existence of the
point (56) can be proved. For now D, E, and F are collinear ; also D
and i^'lie in the line {tt . (14) (25) (36)}. Then since E lies in DF, it
is the intersection of the three planes

          TT,       {(14) (25) (36)},      {^,£•3(12) (23) (25) (43) (36)};
12]                            pappus' theorem                                  23
and hence E is the point of intersection of the line (25) (36) with w.
But ^ also lies in the intersection of

                   TT,   {J5'^«(16)(36)},     {^^e(45)(25)}.
Thus the line (25) (36) must intersect EJH^-           Hence the two planes
                  {^:^e(16)(36)} and {^5^e (25) (45)}
are identical ; and hence the point (56) exists.
    The assumption [as to the existence of (56)] made in the course of
the proof of Pappus' Theorem has not been deduced from the preceding
axioms. Hilbert* has shown that Pappus' Theorem cannot be deduced
from axioms I to XV. Thus the 'fundamental theorem,' or some
equivalent theorem, must be assumed as an axiom.
    But there is an entirely different line of proof (requiring farther
axioms) of the fundamental theorem, which may be called 'von
Staudt'st continuity proof.'
    This proof in its original form contains an oversight, which was first
pointed out by KlemJ. The proof will be given here in its amended
form. The proof requires that relations of order among points on lines
should have been introduced.
    Furthermore for the case of Greometries with a finite number
of points, it has been shown by J, H. Maclagan-\Vedderburn§ that
Pappus'
the       Theorem
    aforesaid      canfiniteness
               one of   be provedof without
                                     number. any further axioms, beyond

    * Cf. loc. cit., chapter VI, and §§ 44 to 48 of this tract.
    t Cf. Geometrie der Lage, § 9, paragraph 106.
    J Cf. Zweiten Aufsatze iiber nicht-Euclidische Geometrie, Math. Anual. vol. vi.
1873.
    § Cf. A Theorem on finite Algebras, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. voL vi. 1905, and
Finite Projective Geometries, by O. Veblen and W. H. Bussey, Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc. vol. vn. 1906, p. 246.
                           CHAPTER              IV.
                                  ORDER.

    13. If A, B, C are three collinear points, the segment ABC —
written segm (ABC) — is defined* to be the collection of all collinear
points JT, such that there is some pair of points 3/ and
                                                      A  1/' satisfying both
Harm {AyCy') and Harm {ByXy). Also segm (ABC) is the collection
of all points on the line ABC which, do not lie on segm (ABC). The
extreme instances of the various definitions are so arranged that A and
C do not belong to segm (ABC), and that B does belong to segm (ABC).
    The basis of these definitions can easily be perceived by considering
the Euclidean line made projective by adding in the point at infinity.
For if B on such a line lies between A and C, and X is any other point




between A and C, then, since pairs of harmonic conjugates separate
each other, the two point-pairs A, C and B, X define an involution
with real double points, say y and y . Thus in the Euclidean line, if X
be any point in the segment ^ C in which B also lies, the two points y
and y exist with the property described in the above definition of
segm (ABC). Conversely this characteristic property is here taken
as the definition.
     It can be proved without any further axioms that the propositions,
D belongs to segm (ABC), and, B belongs to segm (ADC), imply each
other. Also if D lies in segm (ABC) and is distinct from B, then C

                             * Cf. Fieri, loc. cit.
13, 14]                          AXIOMS     OF ORDER
                                                                                       25
lies in segm {BAD).          Also if D A lies in segm {ABC) and is distinct
from A, then G lies in segm {BAD).
    Furthermore since the harmonic property of four points is projective,
it follows that both the properties ex-
         pressed by D belongs to segm {ABC),
and D belongs to segm {ABC), are pro-
jective.
    14. But further axioms are required
to complete the usual properties of
segments. They can be enunciated (c£
Fieri, loc. cit.) as follows :
    XVI. If A, B, C are three distinct
collinear points, and D is distinct from
A and C, and belongs to segm {ABC),
then D belongs to segm {BCA).
    XVII. li A, B, C are three distinct
collinear points, and D belongs both to
segm {BCA) and to segm {CAB), it
cannot belong to segm {ABC).
    XVIII. If ^, B, Care three distinct
collinear points, and D is a point, distinct from B, belonging to
segm {ABC), then segm {ADC) is contained in segm {ABC).
    The above are the three axioms of order. A relation of separation,
to hold between two couples, A and C, B and D, of collinear points,
can be defined thus : A and C wiU be said to ' separate ' B and D —
which will be expressed symbolically by S{ABCD) — when A, B, C, D
are four distinct collinear points, and D belongs to segm {ABC).
    The conditions which must be satisfied by such a relation of
separation (♦S'), so that it may arrange the points on each line in a
closed order have been investigated by Vailati*. These conditions are
as follows :
       (a)    8 {ABCD) is equivalent to S {BA DC),
       {^)    S {ABCD) is equivalent to ^ (^ DCB),
       (y)    S {ABCD) excludes S{ACBD),
    * Cf. two papere in vol. v. of the Bivista di Matematica (Turin), 1895, Sulle
relazioni di posiziane trapunti cC una linea chitisa, and, Sulle proprieta caratteristiche
delle varieta a una dimensione. The whole question of order is exhaustively
considered by Russell, Principles of Mathematics, ch. XXIV and XXV.
26                  THE CONCORDANCE       OF SENSES               [CH, IV

       (8) If P, Q, B, S respectively stand among other terms in this
relation in any order with the same pair of
terms A and B, then either
  S(FQBS), or S{PBQSl or S{FBSQ),
     (c) If S {ABGD) and S {A CBE\
            t\iQi\S{ADBE).
    The relation of separation, S, as defined
above, can be proved to satisfy these con-
ditions.

    15. A relation among the points on a line can be defined which
arranges them in an open order, with any arbitrarily assumed point A,
of the line as the initial point.
    If ^, ^, C are three distinct collinear points, then E is said to
follow D in the ^-order (ABC), if any of the following cases hold :
       (1) Z> lies in segm (ABC) and E in segm {ACD) ;
       (2)A D lies in segm {ABC), excluding A and C, and E lies in
segm {A CD), excluding A and D ;
       (3) D coincides with A, and E is any other point of the line ;
       (4) D coincides with C, and E lies in segm {ABC), excluding
A and C.
    It can be proved that if A, B, C are distinct and collinear points,
and E follows D in the /S-order {ABC), and I) is distinct from A,
then the >S^-orders {ABC) and {ADE) are the same for any two points
of the line.
     The ;S-order {ABC) is said to be 'concordant' with the *S'-order
{DEF) — expressed symbolically by {ABC) /S^-concord {DEF)—vfhen
either of the three following cases hold : In the >S^-order {ABC), either
(1) E follows D, E follows F, and F follows F, or (2) E follows D,
F follows E, and F follows D, or (3) B follows E, F follows E, and
Z> follows F. In the other three possible cases with respect to the
order of B, E, F on the line ABC, the /S^-orders {ABC) and {BEF)
are said to be discordant — expressed symbolically by {ABC) ^-discord
(DEF).
     Then it can be proved that if J., B, Care three distinct collinear
points, and B, E, F are three distinct points on the line ABC, the
>S^-order {DEF) is concordant with one and only one of the >S^-orders
{ABC) and {ACB), and also that the ^"-orders {ABC) and {BCA) are
concordant.
14-17]             WIDER     DEFINITION      OF   SEGMENTS                       27

    We thus arrive at the idea of a 'sense' (or, way) round a line* ; if
A, B, G are three distinct collinear points, and D, P, Q are three
distinct points on this line, and by some process of correspondence P is
related to Q, then, if {DPQ) S-concord {ABC), P will be said to move
to Q by this correspondence in the sense {A BC) from D.
   Discordant
Concordant      senses
            senses  are {ABC)   and same
                        called the    (CBA)
                                          sensaare also said to be 'opposed.'
   16. If A, B, C be three distinct collinear points, the two segments
                               A,


segm {ABC) and segm {ABC) are called the 'segments between A and
C,' and they are said to be complementary to each other.
    Segments, as defined above, possess, either two terminal points —
such as A and C in segm {ABC), — w two bounding points belonging
to the complementary segment — such as A and C bounding segm
{ABC). The definition of a segment will now be enlarged so that this
property of being 'between' two points does not flow from the
definition.
    A segment of a line is now defined to be a set of points on the line,
(1) which does not include the whole line, (2) which includes at least
two distinct points on the line, (3) which is such that, if A and B be
any two distinct points belonging to it, one of the two complementary
segments between A and B is contained entirely within it.           A
    Thus, when A, B, C are collinear, segm {ABC) and segm {ABC)
are themselves both segments in this enlarged sense ; but, without a
further axiom, it cannot be inferred that every segment is ' between '
two points.
    A set of points on a line is said to be ' compact,' if every segment
between two distinct members of the set possesses at least one other
member of the set.
    A set of points on a line is said to be ' everywhere dense,' if every
segment of the line contains at least one member of the set.
    A set of points on a line can be compact without being everj'where
dense.

     17. Since ' D belongs to segm {ABC),' and ^E belongs to segm
{ABC),' express projective properties of the ranges ABCD and ABCE,
it follows that *S^ {ABCD) expresses a projective property, and similarly

that, 'E follows D in the >Sf-order {ABC); and, '{ABC) S- \^^^^^^
{BEF),' express projective properties.
    • Cf. von Standt, Beitrage zur Geormtrie der Lage, § 3, and Fieri loc cit.
28                    PROPOSITIONS   ON   ORDER               [CH. IV

    Three important theorems must now be proved,
    (a) UA,B,C are distinct, Harm (A BCD) implies S {A BCD).
    For since we have Harm (ABCjD), points A', B', C, U, Fcan be
found as in the annexed figure. Then
                {ABCD) Tu (A'B'C'JD) Xr (CBAB)




    Hence, if S (ACBB) held, it would be projected into S (CAB D).
But these two relations are inconsistent. Thus S (A CBD) cannot hold.
Similarly S {ACDB) cannot hold. Therefore S {ABCD) must hold.
    (/8) Harm {ABCD) and Harm {AB.CD,) imply that 8{ABB,C)
and S {ADD^C) are equivalent.
    For the conditions Harm {ABCD) and Harm {A B^CD^), render the
annexed figure possible. Hence

      {ABB.C) -Xu {A' VV,C) X^ {UC'C'C) x^' (ADD.C).




   Hence S{ABBiC) and S{ADDiC) are equivalent. This proposi-
     tion may be loosely expressed by saying that B and D move in
opposed senses to or from C.
17,   18]                  HARMONIC     SYSTEMS                         29

   (y) Harm (ABCD) and Harm {ABC.D,) imply that S (ABCC^)
and S (ABDDi) are equivalent.
   For the conditions Harm (ABCD) and Harm (ABCiB,) im-
         mediately secure the possibility of the annexed figure, apart from




the dotted line. Then in the triangles CVC and CiFjCi', the point
(CF.CiFi) is A', the point (VC . FjCi') is A, and the point
(CC . CiCi) is U. But A', A, U sltb collinear. Hence by Desargues'
Perspective Theorem, CCi, V\\, and C'C/ are concurrent.
    Hence C'Cj' passes through B ; let it also cut AA'U in W.
Then

      {ABCC) T/ {UBVV,) Xa (WBC'C) xY {ABDD,).
    Hence .S (ABCC,) and /S' (ABDD,) are equivalent.
    This proposition is loosely expressed by saying that C and 2) move
from J. (or B) in the same sense.

    18. \i A, B, G are three distinct collinear points, the harmonic
system (ABC) is the system of points arrived at by the following
inductive definiton : A, B, C are the initial set of points, A, B, C, D^,
Z>2, A are the second set of points, where A, D«, D^ are respectively
the harmonic conjugates of A with respect to B and C, of B with
respect to C and A, and of C with respect to A and B, and the
{n + l)th set is derived from the 7ith set by adding to the wth set the
harmonic conjugates of each point of the «th set with respect to any
other two points of the nth set.
    It is evident, from the projectivity of the harmonic relation, that a
harmonic system projects into a harmonic system.       Furthermore since
30                   THE LUROTH-ZEUTHEN            THEOREM                 [CH. IV
two sets of three distinct collinear points are projective, it follows that
any two harmonic systems are projective.
    A harmonic system is compact For, if A and B are any two
points of a harmonic system, since any system possesses at least three
points, there is a third point Z> in one of the two segments between A
and B. Now take £J to satisfy Harm {ADBE), then ^lies in segm
(ADB). Hence there is also another point in the other segment
between A and B.
    But a compact system possesses necessarily an infinite number of
points. Hence every harmonic system, and therefore every straight
line, possesses an infinite number of points. Accordingly the axioms
of order, given above, and Fano's axiom have excluded the geometries
with a finite number of points.
    von Staudt in his proof of the fundamental theorem* wrongly
assumed that every compact system of collinear points must be every-
        where dense. This theorem will now be proved for any harmonic
system. It will be called the Liiroth-Zeuthen theorem!. It will be
noticed that a fresh axiom is required.

    19. (a) The new axiom, which will be referred to as the Dede-
kindj axiom, or as enunciating the Dedekind property, is as follows.
    XIX. If u is any segment of a line, there are two points A and B,
such that, if P be any member of u distinct from A and B, segm
(APB) is all of u with the possible exception of either or both of A
and B which may also belong to ti.
    Note that the axioms of order, viz, XVI, XVII, XVIII, and this
axiom need only be enunciated for one line. Then by projection they
can be proved for every line.
    ((3) Consider any segment of a hne, to prove that at least one point
of any given harmonic system of the line must lie within it. Let the
segment be enlarged (if possible at either end) to its full extent so long
as no fresh point of the harmonic system is included.         Now assume

   * Cf. Geom der Lage, § 9, paragraph 103.
   + von Staudt's tacit assumption was pointed out by Klein, Zwciten
Aufsatz iiber nicht Euclidische Geometric, Math. Annal. vol iv. 1873. The
proof here given was communicated to Klein simultaneously by Liiroth and
Zeuthen, and published by Klein in a ' Nachtrag ' to the previous article, Math.
Annal. vol. vii. , 1874.
    J The importance of the property, here considered was first emphasized (for the
case of real numbers) by Dedekind, Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen, 1872. Engl.
Trnsl. Essays on the Theory of Numbers, by Prof. Beman, Chicago, 1901.
18,   19]         THE   LUROTH-ZEUTHEN      THEOREM                   31

that the line possesses the Dedekind-property. Then the enlarged
segment is bounded at each end by points, F and G say. If either F
or G belongs to the system, it does not belong to the enlarged segment.
Also all the points of the system (if any) in the enlarged segment belong
to the original segment.
    Firstly let F and G both belong to the system. Then there is
another point A belonging to the system. Assume that it belongs to
the complementary segment. Take D so that Harm {AFDG). Then
D belongs to the enlarged segment and to the harmonic system.
Hence it belongs to the original segment and the harmonic system.
    Secondly let F and G neither belong to the harmonic system.
Hence any segments, abutting on i^ or 6^ and contained in the




complementary segment, must contain points of the harmonic system.
Let J. be a point of the system in the complementary segment.
    Take H, so that Harm {AFHG)         (1).
    Take J, so that Harm (AFGJ)        (2).
    Then (cf. ^ 11 a) ff lies in segm (FAG), and ^ in segm (AFG).
Now in segm (AGF) there is at least one point of the system. Let B
be such a point.
    Take K, so that Harm {ABHK)          (3).
    Then by comparing (1) and (3), (cf § 17 /8) as i^ moves to B,G moves
in the opposite sense to K. Also by hypothesis a series of points such
as B can be found running in sense (AFG) up to i^as a limit. Hence
(cf § 17 a) from (1) the corresponding points JTrun in sense (AFG)
up to 6= as a limit. Hence if C be any point in segm (GAJ), B and K
32                 THE   LUROTH-ZEUTHEN       THEOREM               [CH. IV

may be supposed chosen so that K lies Ain segm {GA C).         But at least
one point of the system lies in segm (GAJ) ; let C be such a point.
    Take L, so that Harm (ABLJ)       (4).
    Take B, so that Harm (A BBC) J5).
    Then (cf. § 17 y) i> is in segm (BA C) ; and as J" moves to C in sense
                                                                      A

(GFA), L moves to D in the same sense. Hence D is in segm (BAL).
But by comparison between (3) and (5), we have (cf. § 17 y), as C moves
to K in sense (GFA) D moves to H in the same sense. Hence B lies
in segm (HAG). Thus D lies in the common part of segm (BAL)
and segm {HAG), that is, in segm {HAL). But this segment is con-
        tained insegm {FA G). Thus i) is a member of the system, and lies
in the enlarged segment.       Hence it lies in the original segment.
    Thirdly let one and only one of F and G — say F — belong to the
system.




   Take A as before in the second case ; also take J so that
                        Y{&.vm{AFGJ)      (1).
    Then in segm {GFJ), a point C belonging to the system exists.
Take D so that Harm {AFDC)                  (2).
    Then / lies as before
                     A
                          in the second case.    Also (cf. § 17 a) from (2),
D lies in segm {FA C) and is distinct from F. Again (cf. § 1 7 y) by
comparing (1) and (2), as J moves to Cin sense A{GFA), G moves to
L> in the same sense. Hence I> lies in segm {FAG), and is distinct
from G. Thus a point of the system lies in the enlarged segment, and
hence in the original segment. .
    Accordingly from the three cases it follows that a harmonic system
19, 20]            VON staudt's continuity proof                            33
is everywhere dense on the Kne containiDg it.          But in the proof the
Dedekind property is assumed as an axiom.

    20. von Staudt's 'continuity proof of the fundamental theorem
(cf. 10) can now be completed. For consider any projective relation
which correlates A, B, C of one line with ^4', B', C" of another line.
Then by the projectivity of the harmonic property, the harmonic system
(ABC) is correlated in a determinate manner with the harmonic
system (A'B'C). But relations of order are projective. Also any
point on the first line not belonging to the harmonic system (ABC) is
(cf § 19) the limit of a class of points belonging to the system. Thus its
correlate on the other line must be the limit of the correlated class of
points of the other harmonic system. Thus the correlates of all the
other points on the two lines are definitely determined.
    Hence the fundamental theorem can be proved by the aid of the
axioms of order and the axiom of the Dedekind property. Then
(cf § 11) Pappus' Theorem can be deduced.
    Maclagan-Wedderburn's Theorem (cf. § 12) proves that the funda-
           mental theorem holds for Greometries with a finite number of points,
and the above 'continuity proof shews that it holds for a Geometry
with an infinite number of points in which the above axioms of order
and the Dedekind property hold.
    We will note in the subsequent work wherever a step in the
reasoning depends upon the fundamental theorem or upon the Dede-
       kind property.
    We can now prove that a harmonically projective correspondence
(cf § 9) is a projective correspondence. For, since a harmonic system
is everywhere dense, a harmonically projective correspondence is
completely determined when the correspondents of three points on one
of the lines are determined. But it has been proved that there is one
and only one projective correspondence which correlates these three
points to their assigned correspondents ; and furthermore (cf § 9) every
projective correspondence is a harmonically projective correspondence.
Hence the proposition follows.
                              CHAPTER             V.

                   QUADRANGULAR             INVOLUTIONS.

    21. We have now to discuss the dependence of the theory of
Involutions upon the Fundamental Theorem. Here the axioms of order,
namely XVI, XVII, and XVIII, will not be required till § 32. The
projective definition of an involution, as a projective transformation of
a line into itself by which each point is interchanged with its corre-
               spondent point, at once leads us into difficulties. For the essential
theorem on which all depends is that, if in a projective transforma-
      tion two distinct points are interchanged, the transformation is an
involution *.
    For consider a projective transformation which interchanges A and
B, and transforms Cinto D. Now (cf. figure) (ABCI))'as(TUVI))
X^C'S' W VC) X u (BADO), Thus there is always at least one projective




transformation which interchanges A and B, and also C and Z>. But
by the fundamental theorem, there is only one transformation which
interchanges A and B, and transforms C into D. Hence this trans-
   * Cf. Schur, Ueber die Grundlagen der Geometrie, Math. Annal. vol, lv. 1902,
21, 22]    DEFINITION    OF QUADRANGULAR        INVOLUTIONS            35

formation must also transform D into C But this conclusion does
not follow without the fundamental theorem.
    Again the general proposition concerning the involutory property
of a transversal section of a complete quadrangle does not follow
without the fundamental theorem. We can however, without the
fundamental theorem, prove the following propositions : If a transversal
cuts the three pairs of opposite sides of a complete quadrangle in A
and A\B and B' ,C and C then
                  (AA'BB'Cf) TT (A'AB'BC),
with two similar propositions. But it does not follow without the
fundamental theorem that the three projective transformations,
indicated in the three propositions, are identical

    22. The important property for our present purposes is that of
three collinear point-pairs, A and A', B and B', C and C, through
which the pairs of opposite sides of a complete quadrangle pass.
There is aLso a further property of such point-pairs, in reference to a
quadrangle with the required property, which it is essential to consider.
Thus in the annexed figure consider those eight triple sets (formed out




of the six coUinear points) which do not contain two members of the
same point-pair, then of these the four sets, A, B, C, and A, B', C\ and
A' , B, C, and A', B', C, are such that the three sides of the quadrangle
EFGH through any set are concurrent in one of the angular points of
the quadrilateral; while the four sets. A', B\ C, and A\ B, C, and
A, B' C, and A, B, C are such that the three sides through any set
form a triangle. Let any member of the first four sets be called a
'copunctual' set, and let any member of the second four sets be called
a ' triangidar ' set
     Write Involq {AA', BB', CC) to mean that the three point-pairs
(a) are collinear, (/8) he on the pairs of opposite sides of a quadrangle,
(y) and that such a quadrangle can be found for which the triple
set (J., B, C) is copunctual,
                                                                 3—2
36                 THEOREMS    ON   INVOLUTIONS


    23. A special case arises when one point-pair, say C and
                                                           [CH.C,V
coincide. Then the single point counts as one point-pair. The
assertion of the special case will be written in the form Invol,
{A A', BB', CO). The fundamental theorem is not required for the
following propositions.
    (a) Harm (ALDU) and Harm (BLCU) imply Invol^ (AD,
BC, UU).
    For (cf. figure) let US and UP be any two lines through SU, and
let >S^ be any point on US.   Let SA and SB intersect UP in P and Q,




and let CP intersect US in S' and SB in H, and let S'Q intersect SP
in K and UA in D'. Let KH intersect US in M and UA in L'.
Then (UBL'O) x^ (USMS') T^ (UA L'D '). But Harm (USMS')
holds. Hence Harm [BL'CU) and Harm {AL'D'U) hold. Hence
from hypothesis L and L' coincide, and thence D and D'.
    (y8) Involq {AD, BC, UU) implies that a point L exists such that
Harm {ALDU) and Harm {BLCU). This follows at once from the
figure of (a).

    24. The fundamental theorem is not required for the following
propositions.
    (a) In vol, {AD, BC, OU) and Invol, {AD, BC„ OU) imply that
C and Ci coincide.
    Firstly let 0 and U be distinct. Let (as in figure) SQPS' be a
quadrangle fulfilling the conditions of Involq {AD, BC, OU), and let
(as in figure) S^Q^PiS^' be a quadrangle fulfilling those of Involq
(AD, BC„ OU). Also let S'C and S^'C, intersect in C, and SS'
and UP in V, and S,S,' and UP, in V,. Then by Desargues'
Theorem, considering SQS' and SiQ^Si, since B, D, 0 are collinear,
SS,, S'Si' QQi are concurrent. Similarly by considering SQV and
'S^i^i^i, since B, U, 0 are collinear, SS,, QQi, VV, are concurrent.
Again by considering /S^PKand SiP^Vu since A, U, 0 are coUinear,
 23, 24]             THEOREMS    ON INVOLUTIONS                      37

 SSj, PPx, VVi are concurrent. Hence the three concurrences are at
 the same point. Hence SSi, S'Si, PP^ are concurrent ; and hence by-
 considering SPS' and SiPjSi, the three points 0, A, C are collinear.




 Hence C and Ci coincide. Secondly let 0 and U coincide. Then the
theorem follows from § 23 ()8) and from the uniqueness of the harmonic
point.
     Corollary. Given five collinear points A, D, B, 0, U, there is one
and only one point C, such that Involq {AD, BC, 0 U).
     ()S) If Involq {AD, BC, OU) holds, a quadrangle can be found
fulfiUing the conditions with the two sides through 0 and C arbitrarily
assumed, and one of the vertices arbitrarily assumed on one of the
given sides.
    For, whether 0 and U are or are not distinct, draw any two Hues
OS and UP through 0 and U. Take S any point on OS. Join SA
and SB, cutting UP in P and Q ; and draw DQ cutting OS in S'.
Then by (a) S'P passes through C. Hence the theorem is proved.
    (y) Invol, {AD, BC, OU) impHes Involq {BC, AD, OU), and
Invol, {DA, CB, OU), and Invol, {AD, OU, BC), and so on. This
is obvious.
   (8) Involq {AAu BB„ OU) and Invol, {A'A^, B'B^, OU) imply
luyo\ {A B',B A', OU).
38      THEOltEM   EQUIVALENT    TO FUNDAMENTAL     THEOREM      [CH. V

     For by (yS) the quadrangles can be chosen, as in the figure, to be
SFQS,, and S^PQS'.      Then by considering the quadrangle SPQS\ the




theorem follows.    This proof holds whether 0 and U do or do not
coincide.

    25. (a) Involq {AD, BC, OU) and Invol^ {AD, BG, U,0) imply
that U and U^ are identical.
    This theorem requires the fundamental theorem for its proof, or —
what is the equivalent — it requires Pappus' Theorem.
    For consider the quadrangle SS'BQ which satisfies the conditions




of Involq {AD, BC, OU).       Then take 1\ to be the point {SB.S'A),
and Q, the point {SD. S'C).
    It follows from § 24 (a) and § 24 (y) that FiQi passes through Ui
and that SS'F-iQi is a quadrangle satisfying Invol^ {AD, BC, UiO).
But by considering the hexagon PiSADS'Qi, it follows from Pappus'
Theorem that F, Q, and l/i are collinear. Hence U and fJi coincide.
24-26]             QUADRANGULAR         TRANSFORMATIONS                        39

    (^) If Invol, (AB, BC, OU) and Invol^ {AD, BC, U^O) imply
that U and U^ coincide, then the fundamental theorem follows.
    This follows at once from the figure of (a). Thus the fundamental
theorem and (a) are equivalent.

    26. A quadrangular transformation of a line (called the 'axis')
into itself is defined thus : Let A, A^, 0, U he four fixed points on
the axis, of which 0 and U may coincide, then a quadrangular trans-
           formation ofany point Jl of the axis with the corresponding point JTi
is defined by Involq {AXi, JTAi, OU).
    It follows from the corollary of § 24 (a), that to any point J." on the
line there is one and only one correspondent. Furthermore it foUows
from the figure of § 24 (a) that a quadrangular transformation is a
projective transformation of the second degree, the 'initial vertex' of
projection being (cf. fig. of § 24 (a)) S, the 'final vertex' of projection
being S', and UP being the 'auxiliary line' on to which the axis is
projected. The line SO is the 'line of vertices.' If 0 and Z^" coincide
the figure of § 23 (a) illustrates the construction.
    Furthermore it is evident that any projective transformation of the
second degree is a quadrangular transformation.
    The points 0 and U are self-corresponding points in the trans-
                  formation. Bythe aid of the fundamental theorem, it can easily be
proved that any projective transformation of a line into itself which
possesses at least one (real) self-corresponding point is a quadrangular
transformation.
    The point A, in the above transformation, corresponds to the point
Ai. Also the transformation is completely determined by A and Ax,
0 and U. Furthermore (cf § 24 (y) and (8) since Involq {AX^, XA^,
OU) and Invol^ {AB^, BA^ OU) imply Invol^^ {BX^, XB^, OU), it
follows that any other two corresponding points B and Bi of the
transformation can replace A and Ai. Thus a quadrangular trans-
           formation iscompletely determined by its self-corresponding points
(say, 0 and IT) and by the correspondent of any one point (say, Ai
corresponding to ^4). Such a transformation will be represented by
(AA^O'-U-). But in the particular case when 0 and ?^" coincide, the
symbol (AAiU'-U'-) wiU be replaced by the shorter symbol (AAiU^).
    A quadrangular transformation, such as {AAi U'-), with only one
self-corresponding point will be called* a ' ProspectiArity.'
    (ABC.) quad {A' B' €'...) wiU mean that there is a quadrangular
                     * Cf. Schnr, loc eit. Math. AnnaL vol. lv.
40             QUADRANGULAR      TRANSFORMATIONS                [CH. V


transformation transforming A to A', B to B' , C to C, and so on : also
(ABC...) prosp (A'B'C...) will mean that there is a prospectivity
transforming A to A' , B to B', C to C .
    (a) (ABOU) quad (A'B'OU) and (ACOU) quad (A'C'OU)
implies that (ABCOU) quad (A'B'C'OU).
    For in all the cases the quadrangular transformation is the trans-
          formation {AA'O'^U^). This also holds when 0 and U coincide.
Hence we have,
    Corollary. (ABU) prosp {A'B'U) and {ACU) prosp {A'C'U)
implies {ABGU) prosp {A'B'G'U).
    (/8) {ABOU) quad (A.B.OU), and (A.B^OU) quad (A^B^OU)
imply (ABOU) quad (A,B^OU).
    For the conditions are Invol^ (^^i, ^^i, 0?/) and Involq
(^1^2, ^1^12, Of/). Hence (cf. § 24 (8)) Invol^ (Ji?^, ^^2, OU),
that is, (ABOU) quad (A,B^OU).
    This also holds when 0 and CT" coincide. Hence we have,
    Corollary. (ABU) prosp (A^B.U), and (A,B,U) prosp (A.B.U)
implies (ABU) prosp (A^B^U).
   (y) (AB...) quad (J'j9' ...) implies (^'^'...) quad (^^ .,.)■
   This follows from § 24 (y).
                                  CHAPTER               VI.
                      LINEAR        NUilERATION-SYSTEMS.

    27. Pythagoras is said to have insisted to the verge of mysticism
on the fundamental importance of number in forming a conception of
the universe. This importance, as we now know, arises from the fact
that by the use of the system of positive and negative real numbers
all the points of three dimensional space can be systematically named,
using four numbers as four names for each point.
    Furthermore, and it is here that the importance of the method of
naming arises, the names (.r, y, z, u) can be so a.ssigned, that a homo-
          geneous indeterminate equation of the first degree represents a plane,
and so on.
    This method of naming points was first performed by means of the
properties of distance, and the Cartesian Geometry resulted. But the
converse procedure has now to be established*.
   * The germ of the method by which projective coordinates are here introduced
was first given by v. Staudt, Beitrdge zur Geovietrie der Lage, 1857, §§ 19, 20,21, in
the calculus of ' Wiirfen.' These ideas were applied to the problem under con-
                   sideration byFiedler, Vierteljahrsschrift der naturforscbenden Gesellschaft in
Zurich, Bd. xv. 1871, and Liiroth, Math. Annal. Bd. vm. 1875, and R. Sturm, Math.
Anml. Bd. ix. 1876, also Fiedler, Die Darstellende Geometrie, 1st Ed. 1871, pp. 505
— 580, 3rd Ed. 1888, much enlarged. But in none of the above is the method con-
        sidered inrelation to a very definite system of axioms. The theory is explained at
length by Lindemann in his edition of Clebsch's Vorlesungen itber Geometrie, vol. il
part 3. The exposition of the method is supplied by Hilbert, loc. eit. §§ 24 — 50, for
Descriptive Geometry with a Euclidean axiom. Hilbert's exposition is amplified
and completed by Vahlen, loc. cit. Both Hilbert and Vahlen consider the
question of the introduction of a 'generalized number-system' as coordinates when
the Fundamental Theorem and Pappus' Theorem do not hold, in fact the inverse
problem of §§ 44 — 48 below. Hilbert's exposition is applied to Projective Geometry
by Schur, Math. Annal. Bd. lv. 1902. I have made large use of Schnrs memoir.
But the subject has admitted of further simplification by the aid of Burali-Forte's
investigations, cf. loc. cit. § 28 below.
42                        SYSTEMS     OF   MAGNITUDES                      [CH. VI

    We first indicate the existence of a complete system of magnitudes
associated with the points of any segment of a line. By taking any
of these magnitudes as an arbitrary unit, the points on the segment are
uniquely associated with the positive real numbers; then the points
on the complementary segment are associated with the negative real
numbers. Thus a one-one relation is established between the points
on any arbitrarily assumed line and the whole set of positive and
negative real numbers. Three homogeneous coordinates can then be
assigned to the points on a given plane, taking an arbitrarily assumed
triangle of reference ; and thence four homogeneous coordinates to any
point in space.

    28. The fundamental properties necessary in order to constitute
a complete system of magnitudes must first be understood *.
    The symbol + is not otherwise determined than by the assumption
that x^-y represents the entity, which is arrived at as the result of the
operation + upon the two entities x and y, when these entities are of
suitable character.
    Any class is a 'field' with respect to +, if, when x and y are any
members of it, x -vy is also a member of it. Assume now that G^ is a
field with respect to +, and let small italic letters, », h, c, ..., be
supported always to represent members of G^ , unless they are other-
      wise defined. The null members of Go are its members x such that
always a+x = a. Let G be Go, exclusive of its null members.
    a>b, read as '« is greater than b,' is defined to mean that a member
of G, X say, exists such that a-b + x. Also b<a means the same as
a>b; b<ais read as * 6 is less than a.'
    6a means the subclass of Go whose members are all ' less than ' a.
If M is a subclass of Go, Ou means the class of members of Go each of
which has the property of being less than a member of u.
    A 'bounded existent' subclass of Go is a class which has some
members and is such that there exists a member of Go greater than
any member of this subclass.

    * This subject has been exhaustively treated by Burali-Forte, cf . Formulaire de
Math(5matiques, iv. Thiorie des Grandeurs, Turin, Edition of 1895, also Les
proprietes formales des operations algehriques, Eivista di Matematica, vol. vi.
Turin 1899, which is the memoir of which parts are here briefly summarized, also
Sulla teoria generale della grandezza e del numeri, Atti dei Accad, R. di Torino,
vol. XXXIX. 1903. See also E. V. Huntington, A set of Postulates for Real Algebra,
Trans. Avier. Math. Sac. vol. vi. 1905, especially § 3, Theorem 30.
27, 28]                 SYSTEMS OF MAGNITUDES                            43

    The upper limit (if it exist) of a bounded existent subclass of Go,
u say, is the single member of Go, x say, such that 6x^6u.
    The axioms which must hold, in order to constitute G<, a complete
system of magnitudes in respect to the operation +, are as follows :
    (1) (to is a field with respect to +,
   (2) a + h = h-\-a,
   (3) a + (fe + c) = (a + 6) + c,
   (4) a + c = h + c, implies a = b,
   (5i) At least one null member of Go exists,
   (og) At least one member of G exists,
     (6)   If a is a member of G^, a + 6 is a member of G,
     (7)   Either a = h, or, a< b, or, a>b,
     (8)   If a is a 6^, then at least one member of 6a is a G.
     (9)   Every bounded existent subclass of G, possesses an upper
limit.
    Axiom (9) may be called the Dedekind axiom and should be
carefully compared with the Geometrical Dedekind axiom given
above.
    It can now be proved that there is one unique null member of Go :
call it 0+. Also if a + 6 = 0+, then, a = 0+, and, 6 = 0^.; and if
a + b^O+, then either a 4=0+, or, 6 + 0+. The ordinary elementary
properties of + and > and < can now also be proved.
    Again the following definitions are made, Oj- stands for 0+, larfora:,
2x for x + x, and so on. These are the multiples of x.
     The 'principle of Archimedes' is proved, namely that there always
exists an integer m such that ma > b ; and the existence of submultiples
is proved, namely that if m is any integer there always exists one
unique member of Go, x say, such that mx = a.
     If r is the rational number jnjn, then ra is defined to be that single
member of G, x say, such that nx = ma.
     Let 5 be any (positive) real number ; let u be the class of rational
numbers less than s, and with 5 as its upper limit ; and let ua denote
the class of members of Go expressible in the form ra, where r is a
member of u. Then sa is that member of Go which is the upper Hmit
of the class ua. Then if s and t are any (positive) real numbers, it can
be proved that
            sa + ta-(s + t) a, sa + sb = s (a -r b), s (Jxt) = (sf) a.
44                        NEGATIVE     MAGNITUDES                       [CH. VI

    Finally, taking any member of G, a saj'', as the 'unit' of magni-
       tude, any other member of G can be expressed uniquely in the form
sa, where s is some appropriate real number. Thus with each member
of Go, d^ real number s is uniquely associated.

    29. Continuing the suppositions of the previous article (§ 28),
subtraction is defined thus ; when h>a, 6 - a is the single member of
Go, X say, such that a-\-x = b. The ordinary properties of subtraction
can now be proved, remembering that negative quantities have received
no definition.
    It is now easy to see the conditions necessary for a class to form a
complete system of positive and negative quantities. Let the class g
satisfy the axioms (1) to (5) with respect to the operation + ; also
let g be divisible into two exclusive classes G and Go, and let Go
satisfy all the axioms (1) to (9), and let G be the subclass of Go,
exclusive of the null element 0+. Finally let there be a one-one
correlation between the members G and G, so that if x and x are any
pair of correlates, x + x'^0+. Then the ordinary theory holds for
members of the class G ; and if a and b are any two members of g,
a-h has a meaning in all cases.
    Also G together with 0+ also satisfies all the axioms (1) to (9).
The symbols > and < now want defining afresh in order to preserve
their usual uniform meaning throughout the whole of g.
    The whole system of positive and negative real numbers can now
be associated by a one-one correspondence with the various members
of g, when any member a oi G has been taken as an arbitrary unit.

    30. Prospectivities on the same line with the same self-corre-
          sponding point will now be proved to have the properties of a system of
magnitudes.
    Definition. {ABU") + {CD U^) is the transformation which results
from first applying the prospective transformation (^^Z7^) and then
applying the prospective transformation {CDU^).
    (a) (ABU^) + (CDU'') is itself a prospectivity. This follows
immediately from § 26 (/3). Thus if it transforms F to G, we have
                     (FG U') = (AB U') + {CD U%
    But we shall usually find it convenient to represent prospectivities
by reference to a given ' initial ' point 0, thus prospectivities will be
written as {OA U% {OBU% and so on.
28-31]              PROSPECTIVITIES         AND MAGNITUDES                            45

   ()3) {OCU') = {OA U^) + {OBV'-) is equivalent to Invol, {OC, AB,
UU)*.
   For (cf. § 24 (yS)) in the figure S and Si are the initial vertices of
the prospectivity (OA U% and S and S^ of the prospectivity {OBU%




               O            A       B     C                              U



'riien it follows immediately from the figure, by considering the
quadrangle SS.PQ, that, (OCU^)^(OAU') + {OBU% impHes Invol,
(OC,AB, UU).
    Again, if the quadrangle SS^PQ is constructed as in the figure,
with its sides through 0 and C, A and B, U and U, then drawing
APS, we see at once that Invol, (OC, AB, UU) implies
                      (OCU') - (OA U') + {OBU%
    {y) (OCU-) - (OA U^) + (OBU') is equivalent to (OA U) prosp
(BGU), and also to (OBU) prosp (ACU).
    This follows at once from (fi).
    The property expressed by (OAU^) + (OBU^) = (OCU') is pro-
               jective. For it expresses the existence of a certain plane figure in rela-
     tion to 0, A, B, C, U, with properties which can be wholly expressed in
terms of coUineations and intersections of lines. But such properties
are projective. Thus if r be any projective transformation and the
correlate of any point P is P„ we have (OA U') + (OBU') = (OCU%
implies (OrArU/) + (OrBrU/) = (OrCrU/).

    31. (a) (OAU')-r(OBU-) = (OBU') + (OAU').
    This follows at once from § 24 (y) and § 30 (fi).
    (^)   {(OA U') + (OB U')} + (OCU')
    For put, using § 30 (a),     = (OA W) + {(OBU-") + (OCU'')\.

                        (OAU'')+ (OBU') = (OCiU')                                   I.
                        (OBU')^ (OOU')^(OAiU-)                                     11.
                        (OCiU')+ (OCU') = (OI)U')                                 III.
                        (OAU^) + (OArU') = (OB'U')                                IV.
                     * Cf. Schur, loc. cit. Math. Annal. vol.
46                    PROSPECTIVITIES     AND   ORDER

     Then from I and IV and § 30 (/8), we have                       [CH. VI
          Involq (OCi, AB, UU) and Invol^ {OU, AA^, UU).
     Hence by § 24 (8) we have
                          lnyo\{C,A,,BD', UU)                         V.
     Similarly from II and III and § 30 (/3) and § 24 (8), we have
                         Involq (CiJi, 57), UU)                    VI.
     Hence from V and VI and § 24 (a), D and D' coincide.
     (y)   (OAU') + (OCU^) = (OBU') + (OCU'),    implies
                             (OAU') = (OBU').
     For (cf. § 26 (13)) we may put
         (ODU') = (OA U') + (OCU') = (OBU') + (OCU').
   Hence (cf. § 30 (ft)) we have Invol^ (OD, AC, UU), and Invol^
(OB, BC, UU).     Hence (cf. § 24 (a) and § 24 (y)) A and B coincide.
    (8) The prospectivity (OOU^) has the 'null' property.                  For
whatever point on the line A may be, we have
                       (00 U') + (OA U') = (OA U%

     32. (ABU) prosp (A'B'U) implies that (AA' U) /S'-concord
(BB'U), and (ABU) >S^-concord (A'B'U).
    For let (ABGDA'U) prosp (A'B'C'D' A"U). Then by the pro-
jectivity of >S^-concordance (cf. § 17), we have (cf. § 26) (ABU)
/S^-concord (GDU) is equivalent to (A'B'U) >S'-concord (C'D'U).
    Hence, since >S^-concordance and /S'-discordance (cf. § 15) are the only
alternatives,
                       (ABU) >S'-concord (A'B'U) is equivalent to
                       (GDU) >Sf-concord (G'D'U)                  (1)




     Again (cf. fig. 1 and § 21)
          (AA'B'U) —g (AFLS) —g (A UB'B) T (B'BA U).
     Hence by the projectivity of /S-concordance
                       (AA'U) /S-concord (A'B'U) is equivalent to
                                                                         47
31, 32]             PROSPECTIVITIES     AND   ORDER


                       {B'BU) .S-concord {BA U),
that is to            {BB' U) ^-concord {AB U).
    Hence, as before,
                           {A A' IT) /S-concord {BB'U) is equivalent to
                           {ABU) >S'-concord {A'B'U)                   (2).
   Thus from (1) and (2), it follows that the following five proposi-
     tions are equivalent, i.e. all true or all false, namely,
                     {AA'U) ;Sf-concord (BB'U),
                      {CC'U) S'-concord {DD'U),
                     {A A' U) ^-concord {A' A" IT),
                      (A B U) Concord {A'B'U),
                      {GDU) /S^oncord {C'D'U),
   Call this result (3).
   But (cf. fig. 2),

          {AA'A"U) -A i {FNQU)—^. {S'MSU) X^ {A"A'AU)




   Hence             {AA"U) /S^-concord {AA'U) is equivalent to
                     {A" A U) >Sk;oncord {A" A U),
               i.e. to {AA"U) /Sf-concord {A'A"U).
   Hence by the theory of the two alternatives,
                     {AA' U) /S'-concord {A'A"U) is equivalent to
                     {AA"U) >S-concord {AA"U).
   But this last theorem of the two equivalents is true. Hence
                 {AA'U) ;8'-concord {A'A"U) is true.
    Hence all the results of (3) follow.
    Note that the present article is the first article since §21, inclusive,
in which the geometrical axioms of order, viz. axioms XVI, XVH,
XVIII, have been required, except so far as they are required to
establish the fundamental theorem which was used in § 25.
48                    NUMERATION-SYSTEMS         DEFINED

                                                                        [CH. VI
    33. (a) {OCU') = {OAU') + {OBU%                   implies that {OBU)
>S'-concord {ACU), and {OAU) S-
concord (BCU).
    This follows at once from § 30 (y)
and § 32.
    ()8) Hence if B lies in segm
(OA U"), then, with the hypothesis
of (a), C also lies in segm (OA U),
and follows A in the ^S-order {OA U).
    (y) Again if C lies in segm
{OA U) and follows A in the /S-order
(0^ U), there is a point B in segm
(0^ Z7) such that
      {OA W) + {OBV) = {OCU^).
    34. (a) Now consider the class, g say, of prospectivities on a
given line, with a given self-corresponding point U.
    Take 0 and E any two arbitrarily assumed points on the line,
distinct from U and from each other. Then any prospectivity of the
class g can be written in the form {OFU'% where P is any point on
the line. Now let Gq be the subclass of g formed by prospectivities
{OPU^), when P is either in the segm {OEU"^), or coincides with 0.
    Then, assuming the determination of the meaning of + given in
§ 30, the class g satisfies axioms (1) to (5) of § 28 [cf § 30 (a),
§ 31 (a), § 31 (/8), § 31 (y), § 31 (8)]. Also G^, satisfies all the nine axioms
of § 28 [cf. § 33 {^), § 33 (y)]. Axiom (9) is proved by noticing that
from § 33 (a), and axiom XVJII of § 19, the upper limit of a bounded
existent class of G^ always exists.
    The class G is the class g, exclusive of the subclass Gq. Thus G
is composed of prospectivities {0PU% where P lies in segm {OEU).
     (/8)   Now consider two points A and A' connected by
                      {OA U') + {OA' U') = {00 U%
    Then the annexed figure shews that Harm {AOA'U) is the
necessary and sufficient condition. Thus all the conditions of § 29 are
now satisfied.
    Hence taking {OEV^) as an arbitrary unit, each prospectivity of g,
and hence each point of the line, is uniquely associated with a real
number ; and conversely all the real numbers, positive and negative,
are thus exhausted.
    In this way 0 is associated with 0, E with 1, and U with oo ; also
33-35]          AN   AGGREGATE   EVERYWHERE      DENSE               49

the order of the real numbers agrees (cf. § 33) with the order of the
points on the line, taken in the sense (OEU).
    Let the ' numeration-system [OEU] ' denote the above method of




assigning real numbers to points on the line OEU, where 0 is the
'zero point,' ^the 'unit point,' and £7" the 'infinity point.*
    35. The investigation of the present article is interesting, though
unconnected with the strict logic of our immediate investigation.
    The set of real numbers of the form 7/^/2", where m and n are
integers, is everywhere dense among the positive real numbers. Now
in the numeration-system [OEU] any point whose number is of this
form can be constructed by a finite number of st^ps.
    (a) For if P be the point with the number x, the point P^,
corresponding to mx, is constructed by

                   {OP^U') = (OPW) + (0PU^)+... torn terms.
    This represents a finite number of constructions.
    (/8) Again let G be the point which corresponds to any real
number x in the numeration-system [OEU], then the point corre-
          sponding to^x can be constructed.
    For (cf figure) take S^ and S2 collinear with U, and P and Q
collinear with U, and G2 on the axis, so that
                 (OGU) X5. (PQU) Xs, (GG,U).
    Thns (0GU')^(GG2U').
    Let PG2 cut S1S2 in Si', and QG in L. Then considering the
quadrangle PGG^Q, we find that Harm (S^S^USJ. Let UL cut OS^
in 31, and OS. in X; and let S.2M cut OU in F.
    Now considering the quadrangle GLPM, ML passes through U,
GP through <S'o, 3IP and GL through Si, and PL through Si'. Hence
AIG passes through Si'.
    w.                                                      4
50               AN AGGREGATE        EVERYWHERE       DENSE

     Again, considering the quadrangle OFMN, we see that NF [CH. VI
                                                             passes
through >S'i',




    Hence finally, {OFU) -Ks, {NMU) X^.' {FGU).
    Thus                   {OFU') + {OFU'') = {OG U%
and therefore F is the point \w.
    (y) Thus, using (^) and starting from the point E which corre-
        sponds to Ijbyw successive constructions the point 1/2" is constructed,
where n is any integer. Hence by the use of (a) the point w/2" is
finally constructed. Points corresponding to positive real numbers of
this form are everywhere dense in segm {OFU) ; and the corresponding
harmonic points with respect to 0 and U are everywhere dense in
segm {OFU).
                        CHAPTER            VII.
                           COORDINATES.


    36. (a) In the numeration-system [OEU], let 0' correspond to
the real number a, and E' to the real
number b. Also let P correspond to
X in the numeration-system [OEU],
and to w in the numeration-system
[O'E'U].    To prove that
   For     x-a + (b — a)x'.

  (0PU') = (00-U') + (0'PU')...{1).
   But by hypothesis
         (OP[/^) = xliOEU%
         {OPm)=^x{OE'ir)         ...(2).
   Now              {OPV) = iOPU") + {aOU''')
                              ^{OPu^)-{oaw)                        (3),
and                {OE' U') = (OE' [/') - {OO V)
                            ^h{OEU^)-a{OEU^)
                            ^{h-a){OEU')                         (4).
   Thusfrom(l), (2), (3), (4),
              X (OEU') = a (OEU^) + ib-a) x {OEU%
    Hence x = a + (b-a)x'.
    ()8) Since (cf. § 30 (8)) the property expressed by the addition of
prospectivities is projective, if the range (OEUP) is projective with
                                                             4—2
52                  ASSIGNMENT     OF   COORDINATES

                                                                [CH. VII
the range {O'E'U'P'), then the number corresponding to P in the
numeration-system [OEU^^ is the same as that corresponding to P' in
the numeration-system [O'E'U'].
    37. (a) Coordinates can be assigned as follows to any point P
on a plane. Take any triangle OUV, and any point E^ on OU, and
any point E^ on 0 V. Let VP intersect 0 C in M, and UP intersect




0 F in N. Let x be the number assigned to M by the numeration-
system [OEi U\ and y the number assigned to N by the numeration-
system [OE^V^ then x and y are the coordinates of P.
    (y8) It is now necessary to prove that the equation of a straight
line is linear. First consider a line not passing through U, or V.
Let P {x, y) be any point on it. Let the line cut OIT, OV, UV in 0^,
Oi, 7" respectively, and also cut FEi in Ei and UEz in E2'.
    Then by § 36 (/8) above x is the number assigned to P by the
numeration-system [OiEi'T], and y is the number assigned to P by the
numeration-system
the form          [O^Ez'T]. Hence by § 36 (a) we have a relation of
                                y — mx + c
as the equation of the line OiO^T.
    Secondly if the line passes through U or V, it follows from (a) that
the equation is of the form
                            y = h, or, x = a.
36-38]                      ANHARMONIC        RATIOS                            53
     (y) According to this assignment of coordinates, the coordinates
of any point on ZJFare (oo, x).
But the coordinates of any point
P, other than L, on the line OL,
are in a constant ratio (cf. (yS)).
Thus the infinities on UVma.y be
avoided, (1) by taking the coordi-
         nates of L to be in the same
constant ratio as those of any other
point P on OL, (2) by writing ^/C,
■ql^ for X and y, and taking ^ = 0 to
be the equation of the line VU.

    38. (a) Assigning the homogeneous coordinates of points in a
given plane as in § 37 (y), let a, h, c and a, b', c be the homogeneous
coordinates of two points A and A'. Then the coordinates of any
point {6, (fy) on the line A A' can be written 6a + ^a', 6b + <^b', 6c + <^'.
The anharmonic ratio of a range of four such points, viz. [(^i, </>i),
(^2, </>2), (^3, «/»3), (^4, «^4)], is defined to be
             (^i<^ - ^2<Ai) {0,^A - 6,<hWii>4 - ^A) (^3<^2 - 0^).
Then by the ordinary processes of analytical geometry, it is proved that
the equality of the two anharmonic ratios is the necessary and sufficient
condition that the two ranges {P^P^P^P^ and (QiQoQiQi) should be
projective.
     (yS) Hence attending to the generation of homogeneous coordinates,
as in § 37 (y), from two numeration-systems, viz. on OF and OU (cf.
fig. § 37 (a)), it follows that if the range (PiP.PJ^i) on the axis OU
corresponds to (jti, x<i, x^, x^ in the numeration-system \OEU\ and
on the same axis Of/' the range (QiQ^QsQi) to (yi, y-2,yi, y*) in the same
numeration -system, then the necessary and sufficient condition for
                          iP,P,PJ'd X (Q^Q.QM
is (xi - X.) (x3 - x,)l(xi - x^) (xs - X.2) = Oi - ya) (ys - y^liy^ - yd (2/3 - yd-
    Define (xi — x^) (x^ — x^Hxi - x^ {x^ - a^a) to be the anharmonic ratio
of the range (PiP^P^P^ in the numeration-system [OFU].
    (y) Note that it has yet to be proved that the anharmonic ratio
as thus defined is the same for every numeration-system on the line.
When this proposition has been proved, it will follow (cf. § 41) as a
corollary that the anharmonic ratio as defined in (a) is the same
for any fundamental triangle OUV in the plane, and for any 'unit'
points L\ and Eo in OU and OV.
54                         HARMONIC     RATIOS                    [CH. VII

    39. (a) Consider ranges on a given axis referred to a given
numeration-system [0£U}. Now any two harmonic ranges are
projective (cf. § 9 (8)) ; hence cf. § 38 (y8) the anharmonic ratios in the
numeration-system [OEU] of all harmonic ranges on the axis are equal.
    Now let B' correspond to - 1 in the numeration-system [OBU].
Then (cf. § 34 (/3)) we have Harm {OEUE'). But the anharmonic
ratio of this range is - 1. Hence the anharmonic ratio of all harmonic
ranges is -1.
    ()8) Now let F and Q be such that Harm {EPE'Q), and let cc
correspond to P, and ^ to ^ in the numeration-system [OEU\ Then
from (a) we find, xy=\.
    (y) But with P and Q as in (/3), we have
                        (OEUQP)-x(UEOPQ).
    Hence (cf. § 36 (yS)) since numeration-systems are projective, we
find that if cc corresponds to P in the numeration-system [OEU], then
- corresponds to P in the numeration-system [UEO].

    40, (a) We can now consider the effect of shifting IT to V,
where U' corresponds to c in the numeration-system [OEU].
    Let P correspond to w in the numeration-system [OEU] and to cc'
in the numeration-system [OEU'].     Then (cf. § 39 (y)) P corresponds
to - and U' to 1/c in the numeration-system [ UEO], and (cf. § 36 (a))

P to y    -T— in the numeration-system [U'EO], and (cf. § 39 (y)) to

      ^— in the numeration-system (OEU').
    (/8) In the numeration-system (OEU) let 0' correspond to a,
E' to b, and U' to c. Also let P correspond to a in the numeration-
system [OEU] and to x in the numeration-system [O'E'U']. Then,
from (a) and from § 36 (a),

                         ^,^(6-cX^-a)
                            (b -a)
    (y) It follows immediately     (x-c)'
                                 from (/8) that the anharmonic ratios of
any range on a given axis in all the numeration-systems on that axis
are equal. Thus the reference to the particular numeration-system
may be omitted in the specification of an anharmonic ratio.
    (S) Considering any range (PiP^PsP^), let x correspond to P4 in
the numeration-system (P^P^Pi). Then, from § 38 (/8) and § 40 (y),
X is the anharmonic ratio of the range (PiP^PJP^).
39-41]           TRANSFORMATION       OF COORDINATES                   55

     4L Let the homogeneous coordinates i, rj, ^ of any point P on a
given plane be arrived at as in § 37 (y), where OUV is the fundamental
triangle. Make the linear transformation
                           i=aiX + biy + CiZ,
                           rj = cu^ + Jay + C3«>

where the determinant of the transformation is not zero.
    Then the three equations .r = 0, ^^ = 0, 2 = 0 determine respectively
the three lines BC, CA, AB.      Referred to x, y, z a& new coordinates




the points A, B, C are respectively the points (a, 0, 0), (0, P, 0),
(0, 0, y), where a, /8, y may be given any arbitrary values. The
coordinates of any point P on AC are (a, 0, ^y). Let Ei be the point
(a, 0, y).
    Then the number corresponding to P in the numeration-system
[AE^C^ is the anharmonic ratio of {CE^AP), that is, 0. Similarly
(a, 0, 4>fi) is any point Q on AB, and E.. is the point (a, 0, P), and ^
is the number corresponding to Q in the numeration-system [J.^2^]-
Thus as in § 37 (y) the coordinates of the point R, where BP and CQ
intersect, can be taken to be x, y, z, where y'jx - 6, and y'/x = <f>.
    But in terms of the new coordinates (x, y, z) derived from the
algebraic transformation, the equation of the line BP is zlx = 6y/a,
and of CQ is ylx = <\>Pla.
    Hence the coordinates {x, y, z) derived from algebraic transforma-
      tion can be identified with those obtained from ABC by the method
of § 37 (y), by putting a = yS = y, or, as is easily seen, by the proper
choice of Ei and E^ when a, ^, y are given.
66             COORDINATES      IN THREE    DIMENSIONS
                                                               [CH. VII
   42. (a) The assignment of coordinates in three dimensions is
conducted in a similar manner.
    Let OUVW be any tetrahedron, and P any point whatever. Let
UP meet the plane OVW in Q, VP the plane OWU in B, and WP




the plane OUV m S. Also VS and WB intersect in L on OU,
 US and WQ in M on OV, UB and VQ in N on OW.
     Now on OU, 0 V, OPT take arbitrary fixed points Ei, E^, E^. Let
cc, y, z be the numbers assigned respectively to L, M, N by the
systems [OE^U], [OE.V] and [OE^W\. Then x, y, z are the
coordinates of P.
     These are made homogeneous by writing xju, y/u, z/u for x, y, z
respectively, and by applying reasoning similar to that in § 37 (y).
     ()8) The equation of a plane is of the first degree. For first
consider a plane not containing any of the corners of the fundamental
tetrahedron OUVW. Let it cut OU \n H^, OV \n H^, OW'in H^,
 VW in K^, WU in K^, UV in K^. Also let P, coordinates
{x, y, Zy u), be any point on it.
    Then (0 FT^) Xp (^i-S'siTs). Hence, referred to the triangle
HiK^K^, the coordinates of P are y, z, u.
    Again {OUW)t viHiKJ^-i). Hence, referred to the triangle
H^K^iK^y the coordinates of P are x, z, u. Hence by the theory of the
transformation of coordinates (cf. § 41), we find a relation of the form
                             x=^ay + bz + cu.
42]              COORDINATES      IN THREE    DIMENSIONS                  57

It is impossible to find other distinct relations of this form by
projecting from W. For if two such relations exist, by elimination a
relation of the form, ai/ + fiz + yii = 0, can be found. But (cf fig. of (a))
the coordinates y, z, u oi P are the same as the coordinates y, z^ u
of Q. Hence the above relation holds between the coordinates of Q.
But Q is any point on the plane OVW, while (cf § 37 (/3)) the relation
between y, z, u is characteristic of a single straight line on OVW.
Hence two linear relations between x, y, z, u cannot hold for any point
on a plane.
    Secondly, the above reasoning holds if the restriction that the
plane does not possess any of the points 0, U, V, W is reduced to
the statement that it does not possess more than one of the points
U, V, w.
    Thirdly, let the plane contain V and W, for instance let it be the
plane VLW of the fig. of (a), then the xiu of P is the xlu of L.
Hence x = du is the equation of the plane. Also the equation of the
plane UVWi^u-Q.
                            CHAPTER             VIII.
                          EXISTENCE THEOREMS.

    43. (a) The Dedekind Axiom (cf. § 19) is independent of the
other axioms. For consider the complete geometry, as we have now
deduced it, in which each point is denoted by four homogeneous
coordinates (a;, y, z, u), their ratios only being relevant. From this
complete set of points select those capable of representation by four
rational coordinates. Then the equation of any plane containing
three such points can be written,
                              lx + mi/ + nz+pu=0,
where /, m, n, p are rational numbers. Call these points the ' rational
points,' and these planes the ' rational planes.' A rational line is the
intersection of two rational planes. Then any two rational points lie
on a rational line, and any two rational lines intersect in a rational
point. All the axioms, with the exception of the Dedekind axiom, are
satisfied in a Geometry restricted to these points and lines. Further-
       more the Fundamental Theorem also holds ; and the rational points on
any rational line form a compact closed series.
     {f3) The existence theorem* for the complete set of axioms,
I— XIX, with the modification of XV into an axiom restricting the
number of dimensions to any finite integral number, n-1, can be
proved as follows : Let the n positive or negative real numbers
(xi, a?2, ... a^n) be considered as the name of a point, where x^, x^, ... x^
are not all zero, and {px-^, px^, .■■ pXn), whereto is any real number not
zero, names the same point as (xi, x^, ■•• x,^. A straight line is defined
to be the set of points satisfying w - 2 independent homogeneous linear
equations involving Xi, x^, ■■■ Xn as unknowns.
    Then all the axioms are satisfied provided that we can specify the
set of entities which {xi, x^, ...Xn), for the various determinations of
{Xi, Xi, ...Xn) can be conceived to name.        Now {x^, x^, ...Xn) can be
    * Cf. Russell, Principles of Mathematics, § 413 and § 360 [note misprint ' real '
for ' complex ' in line 21 of § 360.]
43, 44]     EXISTENCE     THEOREM       OF PROJECTIVE       GEOMETRY   59

taken as naming a certain many-one relation between all the n
integers 1, 2, ... « and some of the real numbers, namely that many-one
relation which correlates 1 to arj, 2 to a-o,... and n to iVn- Thus the
point (xi, a?2, x,, x^ is the class of correlations of which any typical
member is named by {axi, ax^, ax^, ax^), where «4=0. Accordingly
the complete set of points is the complete set of classes of ail such
correlations.
    Hence if a purely logical definition can be given of the set of real
numbers, and if the set of real numbers as thus defined can be proved
from purely logical premises to possess the properties ordinarily
assigned to real numbers in pure mathematics, then the existence
theorem for the Projective Geometry based upon Axioms I to XIX, and
restricted to n dimensions, has been proved. Thus the vital importance
to Pure Mathematics of such a minute logical investigation into the
theory of real numbers is obvious*.

     44. Hubert's proof that the Fundamental Theorem cannot be
deduced from Axioms I— XV will now be considered. Hilbertf himself
has published notes or headings of a proof rather than a proof itself.
The following summary is a condensation of a complete proof by
VahlenJ. The preliminary explanations will occupy more than one
article.
     Consider a class K and two operations + and x with the following
properties :
     (1) ^is a class.
     If a, b, and c are members of K, then
   (2) a -1- 6 is a member of K,
   (3) {a + b) + c^a + (b + c),
   (4) a + b^b + a,
   (5) a + b -a + c, implies b = c,
   (6) There is at least one member of K, z say, such that z-^z = z^
   (7) There is a member of K, x say, such that a^x = b.
    Then it can be proved that there is only one member of K with
the property (6). Denote this member by 0. Also, when a and b are
any given members of K, there is only one member of K with the
                * Of. Russell, loc. cit.. Part II and Part V.
                + Cf. loc. cit. §§ 31—35.
                4: Cf. loc. cit. pp. 1— 110.
60           INDEPENDENCE     OF   FUNDAMENTAL    THEOREM       [CH. VIII

property of a: in (7). Denote by - a, the single member of K with the
property, a + (-a) = 0; and write a - 6 for a + (- b).
    Again make the same supposition that a, b, c are any members
of K, also write ab as a shortened form of a x 6. Then the following
further properties are to hold of K and + and x :
      (8) a (b + c)=ab+ ac,
      (9) (b + c)a = ba + ca,
     (10) {ab)c = a{bc),
     (11) If a + 0, and a6 = ac, then 6 = c,
     (12) If a =1= 0, and 6a = m, then 6 = c,
     (13) There is at least one member of K, z say, such that zz = z,
   (14) If a 4=0, there is at least one member of K, x say, such that
ax = b,
     (15) If a + 0, there is at least one member of K, y say, such that
ya^b.
      Then it can be proved that
                               aO = Oa = 0 ;
also that there is one and only one member of K with the property
(13). Denote it by 1. Also it can be proved that the equations
ax = b, and ya = b, have each of them only one solution, assuming a =1= 0,
and 6 =# 0.
    Let a~^ be defined to be the single member of ^ such that aa~^ = 1.
Then it can be proved that a~^a= 1. But ba~^ must be distinguished
from a~^ b, except when b = a.
    Let 2, 3, 4, etc. be defined thus: 2=1 + 1, 3 = 2 + 1, 4=3 + 1, etc.
All the members of ^ which are thus obtained are called the 'integral'
members of K. If a is any member of K, and n is any integral member
of K, then na = an.
    The 'rational' members of iTare those members of ^, r for instance,
such that there exist two integral members of IC, m and n say, such
that mr - n. Then if a is any member of K, and r is any rational
member of K, ra = ar. Evidently the integral members of K are
among the rational members of K.

    45. These properties, namely (1) to (15) of §44, do not involve
the commutative law for multiplication, namely (th = ba, though of
course they are consistent with it. This possible existence of a class
with the above properties, but excluding the commutative law, can be
44-47]         INDEPENDENCE OF FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM                                 61

verified by considering the class of quaternions, excluding imaginary-
quaternions, but including degenerate quaternions in the form of
positive and negative scalars, and the null quaternion. These satisfy
all the requisite axioms. It is to be noted that if a and b are any
quaternions, then, ab = ba, is not in general true.

    46. Continue the assumption that ^ is a class satisfying (1) to
(15) of § 44, and that all the non-capital letters of any alphabet and
numerals are members of K, as specified in § 44.
    Let ( X, y, z, u) define an object, which we will call a point.
    Here x, y, z, u are not to be all identical with 0 ; also, if a + 0,
(flw*, ay, az, au) defines the same point as (a?, y, z, u). Then a point is
a class of correlations, similarly to the other points defined in § 43 ()8).
Then x, y, z, u are the ' coordinates ' of the point (x, y, z, u). If
X, y, z, u are the coordinates of a point, and satisfy
                              x^+yri + zt, + Mr = 0,
where ^, rj, ^, r are not all equal to 0, then the point is said to lie in
the plane (I, rj, t,, r). Thus the plane {^, rj, I, r) is a class of points.
Also the planes (f, 17, ^, r) and (|a, rja, t,a, ra) are identical, where
a + 0.
     A straight line is defined to be the intersection of two distinct
planes. Then it can be proved that three distinct planes intersect
either in a line or a point.
     Then a line is determined by any two points on it. Also if
(^11^1, Zi, t*j) and (a-a, y^, z^, U2) are any two distinct points, any point
in the line possessing them both can be expressed in the form
{K^i + K^2, K^i + Ky^, K^^i + K^ni ^lUi + Ku^), and conversely any
point whose coordinates can be expressed in this form lies on the
line.
     Also any three non-collinear points determine a plane. If
(a-,, ..., . ., ...), (x2, •••, ••., •••)> (^3> ■••, ••-. ••■) are three non-collinear
points, the coordinates of any point on the plane possessing them can be
expressed in the form (Xj Xi + X^^^ + K ^s, •••> •••, •••)•
     Then Aj, Xo, Xg may be called the coordinates of a point in the plane,
referred to the triangle, formed by (.Tj, ..., ..., ...), (x^, ..., ..., ...),
(^•3, ..., ..., ...), as the fundamental triangle.

    47. (a) It can easily be verified that, with the Geometry of § 46,
Axioms I— XII of § 4, and Axiom XIII of § 7 and Axiom XV of § 8
are all verified. Thus in this Geometry Desargues' Theorem holds.
 62           INDEPENDENCE        OF   FUNDAMENTAL          THEOREM   [CH. VIII

 Indeed if the definitions of §46 be modified so as to reduce the
Geometry holds.
Theorem   to two dimensions, it can still be proved * that Desargues'

    (iS) Axiom XIV, in Pieri's second form, is also verified.
   For let A BCD be any quadrilateral, and F, G, H be the three
harmonic points, as in the figure. Take ABC to be the fundamental




triangle. Then with this assumption, A is (1, 0, 0), B is (0, 1, 0),
C is (0, 0, 1), i> is (a, p, y) ; where no one of a, p, y is 0. Then since
F\\QS, on BC it is of the form (0, /*, v), and since it lies on AD \t is of
the form {6 + <^a, <^^, <^y). Hence ^ =- «^a. Thus F is (0, <^A <i>y\
that is, (0, )8, y). Similarly G is (a, 0, y), H is (a, /3, 0). Thus any
point on FG is {<^a, OP, (6 + <^) y}. Hence L, where FG and AB
intersect is given by ^ + ^ = 0. Thus L is {a, - (3, 0}. But since ft is
not 0, /8 and - (3 are distinct. Hence L and H are distinct. Hence
Axiom XIV holds.


     48. We can now t prove that Pappus' Theorem does not follow
from Axioms I— XV.
     Let (cf fig.) A, B, C and Ai, Bi, Ci be the two sets of three
coUinear points. Then we may choose, ^ to be (1, 0, 0), -ff to be
(0, 1, 0), C to be (1, )8, 0), A^ to be (0, 0, 1), B^ to be (A, /*, v), d to be
(A., fi, 1 + v) ; where /?, y, /a, v are each one not equal to 0.
     The above choice of coordinates is consistent with A, B, C and
Alt Bi, Ci being any six points fulfilling the required conditions.
                * Cf. Vahlen loc. cit. Part II, § 84.
                t Cf. Vahlen, loc. cit., Part II, § 83 and § 110.
47, 48]      INDEPENDENCE         OF FUNDAMENTAL            THEOREM
                                                                                    63
    Then D is on BCi and on B^C.            Hence it can be expressed in both
the forms
            {<^X, e + <f)fjL, <t> (l + v)} and {i + r]\, $fi + rjii, i/v}.




                                    ^'
          Ax
   Hence we may put



   Thus                              r] - <}>v~^ + <f> ;
and                             <t>\^i + <t>v-^\ + <t>\
thus                                  i^- <f>v~^X.
    Hence D is the point {X, /i + v~^fi-v-^\p, 1 + v}. Similarly E is the
point {fji^~\ At, 1 + y}, and F is the point (0, /x, v).
    Thus any point on EF can be written in the form


   If D is such a point, we have the three equations
                                  ^/-)8"'-^                                  (1),
                       (x + i/)fi. = fj. + v-'iJL-v-^\l3                     (2),
                             a; + (a + y)v = 1 + v                           (3).
   Thus from (2) and (3) we find
                               XV-' = v-i xPfJi-\
   Substituting this value of a; in (1),


that is                      A/3/X-1 v = vkfifi-\
64          INDEPENDENCE            OF FUNDAMENTAL                 THEOREM          [CH. VIII

   Now put 8 = A^/A~\ and we find 8v = vS. Also v and 8 can be any
members of K. Thus Pappus' Theorem can only be true when the
commutative law for the multiplication of coordinates holds.
    Hence it follows from § 1 1 and § 45 that neither Pappus' Theorem
nor the fundamental theorem are consequences of Axioms I— XV.




     CAMBBIDGE   : PRINTED   BY   JOHN   CLAY,   M.A.   AT   THE   UNIVERSITY   PRESS.
     Cambridge  Tracts in                Mathematics
         and Mathematical                Physics


No. I. VOLUME AND SURFACE INTEGRALS USED                          IN
          PHYSICS, by J. G. Leathem, M.A. 2s. 6d. net.
No. 2. THE    INTEGRATION OF FUNCTIONS             OF A SINGLE
             VARIABLE, by G. H. Hardy, M.A.        2s. 6d. net.

No. 3. QUADRATIC FORMS AND THEIR CLASSIFICATION
           BY MEANS OF INVARIANT FACTORS, by
             T. J. I'A. Bromwich, M.A., F.R.S.     3^. ed. net.
No. 4. THE     AXIOMS OF PROJECTIVE              GEOMETRY,        by
             A. N. Whitehead, Sc.D., F.R.S.      2s. 6d. net.


In preparation.
       THE     AXIOMS OF DESCRIPTIVE             GEOMETRY,,       by
             A. N. Whitehead, Sc.D., F.R.S.

       THE     DEFINITE INTEGRAL, ITS MEANING AND
             FUNDAMENTAL PROPERTIES, by E. W. Hobson,
             ScD., F.R.S.
       SINGULAR     POINTS    AND   ASYMPTOTES         OF PLANE
             CURVES,   by Miss C. A. Scott.
       THE EIKONAL      AND ITS APPLICATION         TO OPTICAL
             INSTRUMENTS,      by E. T. Whittaker, M.A., F.R.S.

      THE     FUNDAMENTAL THEOREMS OF THE DIF-
                      FERENTIAL CALCULUS, by W. H. Young, Sc.D.

       THE    CIRCLE   AT INFINITY, by J. H. Grace, M.A.
