Introduction                                                                      9




and directed joins) as arrows.
   Thierry Coquand (cf. [4]) discovered L-domains in a general categorical form
independently of us and proved cartesian closedness for both Scott-continuous func-
tions and stable functions. It was Carl Gunter who saw that his definition yields
L-domains if restricted to the poset case.
   As we have the two maximal categories of L-domains and bifinite domains inside
ALG⊥ , it seems reasonable to study their intersection. What we get is a cartesian
closed category properly containing Scott’s bounded-complete dcpo’s. In [12] it is
proved that a universal domain exists for this class. We should mention here that
these posets appear as ‘short domains’ in [9] already.
   The definition of ‘L-domain’ is ‘local’, that is, we require a property of the
principal ideals. One wonders whether the ‘global’ requirement that an L-domain is
a dcpo can’t be dispensed with. So, what about local dcpo’s (each principal ideal is
a dcpo), local bifinite domains and local L-domains?
   Finally, I should like to thank all those people who have helped me in the course
of writing this thesis: Dana Scott, who introduced me to the theory of domains
through a series of enlightening lectures and who helped with many things during
my visit to Carnegie-Mellon University in the academic year 1984/85. Carl Gunter,
who invited me into his own field of studies, who tirelessly explained and helped
by stating research goals. Paul Taylor, whose deep interest in the theory of L-
domains encouraged me to tackle the (at first seemingly unsolvable) general case of
algebraic dcpo’s without least element. But foremost I express my deep feeling of
gratitude to my doctoral advisor, Prof. Klaus Keimel, whose gentle guidance gave
me the necessary amount of orientation whilst leaving me considerable freedom in
conducting my research.
10   Chapter 0:
Chapter 1

Basic Concepts

In this chapter we collect some of the standard results about partially ordered sets,
dcpo’s and continuous functions. Interspersed are several important original con-
tributions, most notably Proposition 1.6, Corollary 1.7, Proposition 1.10, Corol-
lary 1.13, Proposition 1.25, and all of Section 1.5. Proposition 1.1, due to M.Krasner
(cf. [17]), should be better known in the domain theory community. It allows to base
an induction proof on any directed set.
   We have also included several new examples and counterexamples, which should
help the reader to understand the concept of bifiniteness.


1.1      Ordered sets, directed sets, and directed-complete
         partial orders
Definition. A set D with a binary relation ≤ is called an ordered set if the following
holds for all x, y, z ∈ D:

  (i) x ≤ x (Reflexivity)

 (ii) x ≤ y ∧ y ≤ z =⇒ x ≤ z (Transitivity)

(iii) x ≤ y ∧ y ≤ x =⇒ x = y (Antisymmetry)
12                                                    Chapter 1: Basic Concepts




     Ordered sets are also called partially ordered sets or posets in the literature.
Small finite ordered sets can be drawn as line diagrams (Hasse diagrams). We will
also allow ourselves to draw infinite posets by showing a finite part which illustrates
the building principle.
     The word ‘partially ordered set’ indicates that there are also ‘totally ordered
sets’. Indeed, if x ≤ y or y ≤ x holds for any pair x, y of elements in a nonempty
poset D then we call D a chain, or totally ordered.
     Given an ordered set (D, ≤) we can define the dual order ≤′ on D by setting
x ≤′ y ⇔ y ≤ x. The set D together with the dual order is denoted by Dop .
     In the following definition we develop some of the standard notation connected
with the theory of ordered sets.

Definition. Let (D, ≤) be an ordered set.

  (i) A subset A of D is an upper (lower) set if x ∈ A implies y ∈ A for all y ≥ x
       (y ≤ x). We denote by ↑A (↓A) the smallest upper (lower) set which contains
       the subset A of D. The interval ↑x ∩ ↓y we denote by [x, y].

 (ii) An element x ∈ D is called an upper (lower) bound for a subset A ⊆ D, if
       A ⊆ ↓x (A ⊆ ↑x). We denote by ub(A) (lb(A)) the set of all upper (lower)
       bounds of A.

(iii) An element x ∈ D is maximal (minimal) if there is no other element of D
       above (below) it: ↑x ∩ D = {x} (↓x ∩ D = {x}). For a subset A ⊆ D the
       minimal elements of ub(A) are called minimal upper bounds of A. The set of
       all minimal upper bounds of A is denoted by mub(A).

(iv) If all elements of D are below (above) one element x ∈ D, then x is said
       to be the largest (least) element. The least element of a poset is also called
       bottom and is commonly denoted by ⊥. Posets with a least element we will
       call pointed.
1.1     Ordered sets, directed sets, and dcpo’s                                         13




 (v) If for a subset A ⊆ D the set of upper (lower) bounds has a least (largest)
                                                                                      W
        element x, then x is called the supremum (infimum) of A. We write x =             A
               V
        (x =       A) in this case.

(vi) The ordered set D is a ∨-semilattice (∧-semilattice) if the supremum (infimum)
        for each pair of elements exists. If D is both a ∨- and a ∧-semilattice then D
        is called a lattice. A lattice D is complete if suprema and infima exist for all
        subsets A ⊆ D.

      The first structures used in denotational semantics were lattices. It was soon
recognized, however, that in the situations, which denotational semantics tries to
model, suprema of arbitrary subsets do not necessarily exists. On the other hand,
the constructions and methods developed by Dana Scott for lattices can also be
carried out for weaker structures. In some sense, Smyth’s work in [24] and also this
dissertation can be read as a search for the weakest possible definition of ‘semantic
domain’.

Definition. Let D be a poset.

  (i) A subset A ⊆ D is directed (filtered) if it is nonempty and each pair of elements
        of A has an upper (lower) bound in A.

 (ii) A lower (upper) subset of D is called an ideal (filter) if it is directed (filtered).
        Ideals (filters), which contain a largest element, are called principal. They are
        of the form ↓x (↑x), x ∈ D.

(iii) If all directed sets in D have a supremum, then we say that D is a directed-complete
        partial order or dcpo for short. If, in addition, Dop is also a dcpo, then we call
        the poset bicomplete.

      Most posets considered in this work are in fact bicomplete, but this will be a
theorem and hence needs not to be included in the definition.
14                                                     Chapter 1: Basic Concepts




                               W↑
     We use the notation x =        A when we want to express that A is a directed set
with supremum x.
     Directed sets are interesting objects in themselves. We reserve the remainder of
this section to a closer analysis of this concept.

Definition.        (i) A monotone net in a poset D is a monotone function α from a
       directed set I into D. The set I is called the index set of the net.

 (ii) Let α: I → D be a monotone net. A subnet of α is a monotone net β: J → I
       such that for all i ∈ I there is j ∈ J with β(j) ≥ i.

 (iii) A monotone net α: I → D has a supremum in D, if the set {α(i) | i ∈ I} has
       a supremum in D.

     Every directed set can be viewed as a monotone net: let the set itself be the
index set. On the other hand, the image of a monotone net α: I → D is a directed
set in D. So what are nets good for? The answer to this question is given in the
following proposition.

Proposition 1.1 Let D be a poset and let α: I → D be a monotone net. Then α
has a subnet β: J → I, whose index set J is a lattice in which every principal ideal
is finite.

Proof. Let J be the set of finite subsets of I. Clearly, J is a lattice in which
every principal ideal is finite. We define the mapping β: J → I by induction on the
cardinality of the elements of J:

             β(φ) = any element of I;
         β(A) = any upper bound of the set A ∪ {β(B) | B ⊂ A}, A 6= φ.

It is obvious that β is monotone and defines a subnet.
1.2     Algebraic and continuous posets                                             15




      The preceding proposition appears as ‘Théorème 1’ in [17].
      We will make crucial use of nets with lattice ordered index set in the Character-
ization Theorem for retracts of bifinite domains in Section 4.1.
      Not every net has a subnet with a totally ordered index set. An example is the
set of finite subsets of the real numbers. The following theorem is therefore just the
more surprising.

Theorem 1.2 A partially ordered set D is a dcpo if and only if each chain in D
has a supremum.

      The proof, which uses the Axiom of Choice, goes back to a lemma of Iwamura [13]
and can be found in [18].

Corollary 1.3 A partially ordered set D is a dcpo if and only if each monotone
injective net α: I → D, with I an ordinal number, has a supremum in D.


1.2        Algebraic and continuous posets
In the last section we have introduced dcpo’s as structures, in which a directed col-
lection of elements describes a new element: order theoretically the supremum of the
collection. We will now restrict our attention to such dcpo’s, in which every element
can be represented as a directed collection of approximating elements. In the fol-
lowing definition we will make precise what is meant by ‘one element approximating
another element’.

Definition. Let D be a dcpo.

  (i) For elements x, y ∈ D we say that x is way-below y (x ≪ y), if for all directed
                      W↑
        sets A ⊆ D,        A ≥ y implies a ≥ x for some a ∈ A.

 (ii) For an element x ∈ D we define the following subsets:
                                     ↑x = {y ∈ D | x ≪ y}

                                     ↓x = {y ∈ D | y ≪ x}.
16                                                        Chapter 1: Basic Concepts




                                               S                     S
 (iii) For A a subset of D we define ↑A =             ↑
                                                   a∈A ↑a and ↓A =   a∈A ↓a.


 (iv) An element x ∈ D is said to be compact, if it is way-below itself.

 (v) The set of compact elements is denoted by K(D).

Proposition 1.4 Let D be a dcpo. Then the following is true for all x, x′ , y, y ′ ∈ D:

  (i) x ≪ y =⇒ x ≤ y;

 (ii) x′ ≤ x ≪ y ≤ y ′ =⇒ x′ ≪ y ′ .

Proof. (i) Let A be the directed set consisting of the single element y.
     (ii) It suffices to note that if the supremum of a directed set A is above y ′ then
it is also above y, and if there is an element a ∈ A above x then also a ≥ x′ .


Definition. We say that a dcpo D is continuou, if for all x ∈ D the set ↓x is
               W↑
directed and        ↓x = x. It is algebraic, if the set of all compact elements below x is
directed with x as the supremum of this set.

     It is time for some examples. Algebraic lattices were studied long before the
advent of electronic computers. They arise as the lattices of substructures or as the
lattices of congruence relations for general algebraic structures.
     For finite ordered sets the way-below relation coincides with the order relation
and therefore every finite ordered set is an algebraic dcpo.
     Every algebraic dcpo is also a continuous dcpo but the converse does not hold.
The unit interval, for example, is a continuous lattice but contains only a single
compact element: 0. Ordered by inclusion, the open subsets of a compact topological
space form a continuous lattice. Here a set O1 is way-below a set O2 if O1 is contained
in O2 .
     It is instructive to give an example of a dcpo which is not continuous. Figure 1.1
shows such a poset. There the element b is not compact, because the limit of the
1.2     Algebraic and continuous posets                                                               17




                                                      ⊤                 c
                                                                        A
                                                                    `     A
                                                                `             A
                                                                               A
                                                            `
                                                                                  A
                                      a3              c                            A
                                                                                      A
                                            c                                           A
                                 a2                                                       A
                                                                                        A
                            a1        c                                                   Ac
                                       HH                                                  b
                                            HH                                     
                                                        HH 
                                                          c

                                                                        ⊥




                           Figure 1.1: A non-continuous dcpo




sequence (an )n∈N is above b although no element of the sequence is greater than b.
Therefore b is not the supremum of the elements way-below it.
      The following trivial observation will be of some help in the following sections:

Proposition 1.5        (i) If D is a continuous dcpo and if x, y are elements in D then
                                                                                                W↑
        x is way-below y if and only if for all directed subsets A of D with                         A=y
        there is a ∈ A such that a ≥ x.

 (ii) Let D be an algebraic dcpo. An element x of D is compact if and only if for
                                                 W↑
        all directed sets A ⊆ D with                   A = x there is a ∈ A such that a = x.

Proof. In both cases only the ‘if’-part is interesting.
      (i) We take for A the set ↓y and get an element z ≪ y which is above x. By
Proposition 1.4, x is also way-below y.
18                                                      Chapter 1: Basic Concepts




     (ii) Take for A the set of compact elements below x.


Proposition 1.6 Let D be a dcpo in which every principal ideal is a continuous
dcpo. Then the following holds:

  (i) If y ≪ y ′ holds in ↓x then y ≪ y ′ holds in D.
                S
 (ii) K(D) =        x∈D K(↓x).

                                                                          W↑
Proof. Assume y ≪ y ′ in ↓x. Let (zi )i∈I be a directed set with z =                   ′
                                                                             i∈I zi ≥ y .

Inside the continuous dcpo ↓z we can represent y ′ as the directed supremum of
elements (aj )j∈J , all of which are way-below y ′ in ↓z. All elements aj belong also to
↓x and because y is way-below y ′ here, there is some aj0 which is above y. Going
back to ↓z we see that y is below aj0 which is way-below y ′ and hence y is way-below
y ′ in ↓z by Proposition 1.4. This implies in particular that some zi0 must be above y.
     The second part follows directly from (i).


Corollary 1.7 Let D be a dcpo.

  (i) D is continuous if and only if ↓x is a continuous dcpo for all x ∈ D.

 (ii) D is algebraic if and only if ↓x is an algebraic dcpo for all x ∈ D.

     For continuous dcpo’s the way-below relation has the following important inter-
polation property.

Proposition 1.8 Let D be a continuous dcpo and let x, y be elements of D. If x is
way-below y then there is z ∈ D such that x ≪ z ≪ y holds.

Proof. Given an element x way-below some element y we define the set

                          A = {a ∈ D | ∃a′ ∈ D : a ≪ a′ ≪ y}.
1.2     Algebraic and continuous posets                                                           19




The set A is directed because if a ≪ a′ ≪ y and b ≪ b′ ≪ y then by the directedness
of ↓y there is c′ ∈ D such that a′ ≤ c′ ≪ y and b′ ≤ c′ ≪ y and again by the
directedness of ↓c′ there is c ∈ D with a ≤ c ≪ c′ and b ≤ c ≪ c′ . We calculate
the supremum of A: let y ′ be any element way-below y. Since ↓y ′ ⊆ A we have that
W↑        W↑                                                                  W↑          W↑
     A≥        ↓y ′ = y ′ . This holds for all y ′ ≪ y so by continuity y =        ↓y ≤        A. All
                                                                  W↑          W↑
elements of A are less than y, so in fact equality holds:              ↓y =        A. Remember
that we started out with an element x way-below y. By definition there is a ∈ A
with a ≥ x and hence x belongs to A. That was to be proved.


Proposition 1.9 In a continuous dcpo minimal upper bounds of finite sets of com-
pact elements are again compact.

Proof. Let x be a minimal upper bound of the finite set A of compact elements.
We have A ⊆ ↓x and since the latter set is directed there is an upper bound x′ of
A in ↓x. Because x is a minimal upper bound of A we must have x = x′ which is
tantamount to saying that x is compact.


      In order to represent a continuous dcpo D it is not necessary to give all elements
explicitely. It is sufficient to know about a dense subset of D. Each element of D
can then be represented as a directed collection of elements from this dense subset.
The following definition presents this idea in a precise form.

Definition. A subset B of a continuous dcpo D is called a base of D if for each
element x ∈ D the set ↓x ∩ B is directed with x as the supremum.

      A continuous dcpo may have many different bases and none of these may be
minimal: if D is the unit interval we may take for a base all rational numbers
between 0 and 1. We may also take only those rational numbers which have a
denominator divisible by 2, or divisible by 6, and so on. If D is algebraic, however,
each base must contain the compact elements. Conversely, the definition of ‘algebraic
20                                                    Chapter 1: Basic Concepts




dcpo’ tells us that each element of D can be expressed as the directed supremum of
compact elements. This explains why we can speak of the base K(D) of an algebraic
dcpo.

Definition. A dcpo D is called ω-continuous (ω-algebraic) if D is continuous (al-
gebraic) and contains a countable base.

                                                      S
Proposition 1.10 If D is algebraic then K(D) =         x∈D K(↓x).


Proof. This follows directly from Proposition 1.6 and Corollary 1.7.


1.3     Scott-topology and continuous functions
We have said before that for us the interpretation of the order relation on a dcpo
is that of one element approximating another. It is therefore not surprising that
we choose as homomorphisms between dcpo’s those functions, which allow us to
calculate the value of an element x from the values of the approximations to x.

Definition. Let D and E be dcpo’s. A function f : D → E is continuous if for each
                                      W          W↑
directed subset A of D the equality f ( ↑ A) =    a∈A f (a) holds. We denote the set of

all continuous functions from D to E by [D −→ E]. The functions in [D −→ E] are
ordered pointwise, that is: f ≤ g ⇔ ∀x ∈ D : f (x) ≤ g(x). The identity function on
a poset D is denoted by idD , the constant function with image x is denoted by cx .

Proposition 1.11 Let D and E be dcpo’s.

  (i) Each continuous function from D to E is monotone.

 (ii) The composition of two continuous functions is continuous.

(iii) The function space [D −→ E] is a dcpo.
1.3     Scott-topology and continuous functions                                              21




Proof. (i) If x ≤ x′ are elements of D and if f : D → E is a continuous function then
we consider the directed set {x, x′ }. By definition we have that f (x′ ) = f (x ∨ x′ ) =
f (x) ∨ f (x′ ). This says that f (x) is below f (x′ ).
      (ii) This is trivial.
      (iii) Let F be a directed collection of functions from D to E. Let g: D → E be
                                                      W↑
the function, which is defined by g(x) =                f ∈F f (x). Let A ⊆ D be directed.
                                       _               _               _
                                           ↑               ↑                   ↑
                                     g(        A) =                f(              A)
                                                       f ∈F
                                                       _ _
                                                           ↑               ↑
                                                 =                             f (a)
                                                       f ∈F a∈A
                                                       _ _
                                                           ↑            ↑
                                                 =                             f (a)
                                                       a∈A f ∈F
                                                       _
                                                           ↑
                                                 =             g(a).
                                                       a∈A

This shows that g is continuous.

      Not every monotone function is continuous but for continuous dcpo’s we have
the following

Proposition 1.12 Let D be a continuous dcpo, E a dcpo, and let f : D → E be a
monotone function. Then
                                                       _
                                           f c (x) =       ↑
                                                               f (y)
                                                       y≪x

is the largest continuous function below f .

Proof. Let A ⊆ D be directed. First note that by the interpolation property an
                              W↑
element y is way-below             A if and only if it is way-below some element of A. Thus
we can calculate
                                          _                _
                                    f c(   ↑
                                               A) =                ↑
                                                                           f (y)
                                                               W↑
                                                       y≪              A
                                                        _ _
                                                               ↑           ↑
                                                  =                            f (y)
                                                       a∈A y≪a
                                                       _
                                                         ↑ c
                                                  =                f (a).
                                                       a∈A
22                                                      Chapter 1: Basic Concepts




If g: D → E is any continuous function below f then for all x ∈ D : g(x) =
W↑               W↑             c
    y≪x g(y) ≤     y≪x f (y) = f (x).



Corollary 1.13 The function space [D −→ D] is bicomplete whenever D is a con-
tinuous and bicomplete partial order.

Proof. Let A be a filtered collection of functions from D into D. We define f (x) =
V
    a∈A a(x).   Clearly, f is a monotone function on D. By Proposition 1.12 f c is the
infimum of A in [D −→ D].


     In the light of Proposition 1.12 it is clear that we may define a continuous function
on a continuous dcpo by assigning values to the elements of a base only. If the domain
D is even algebraic, then there is a 1-1 correspondence between monotone functions
on the base and continuous functions on D.
     The term ‘continuous function’ is justified by the observation that each dcpo
carries a topology which makes continuous functions into topologically continuous
ones.

Definition. For a dcpo D we define the Scott-topology σ(D) on D as follows: a
set O ⊆ D is Scott-open if it is an upper set and if for each directed set A ⊆ D,
W↑
     A ∈ O implies the existence of an a ∈ A ∩ O.

     First examples for Scott-open sets in a dcpo D are sets of the form D \ ↓x for
x an arbitrary element of D. The following propositions illustrate the connection
between Scott-topology and the order theoretic concepts developed so far.

Proposition 1.14 Let D be a continuous dcpo.

    (i) If x is an element of a Scott-open set O then there is a y ∈ O with y ≪ x.

 (ii) The sets ↑x form a basis of σ(D).
1.3     Scott-topology and continuous functions                                                23




(iii) The Scott-topology is T0 .

Proof. Let O be a Scott-open subset of D and let x be an element of O. We
                                                         W↑
represent x as a directed supremum: x =                   y≪x y and by the definition of σ(D)

there is some y ≪ x which belongs to O.
      (ii) follows immediately from (i).
      As for (iii), suppose x and x′ are distinct elements of D. By the antisymmetry
of the order relation we must either have that x is not below x′ or that x′ is not
below x. Assume x 6≤ x′ . The set ↓x′ is Scott-closed and hence D \ ↓x′ is an open
neighborhood of x not containing x′ .

Proposition 1.15 For dcpo’s D and E, a function f from D to E is continuous if
and only if it is topologically continuous with respect to σ(D) and σ(E).

Proof. Let f be a continuous function from D to E and let O be an open subset
of E. It is clear that f −1 (O) is an upper set because continuous functions are
                                                    W↑
monotone. If f maps the element x =                  i∈I xi ∈ D into O then we have f (x) =
  W↑                  W↑
f(    i∈I xi )   =     i∈I f (xi )   ∈ O and by definition there must be some xi which is
mapped into O. Hence f −1 (O) is open in D. For the converse assume that f : D → E
is topologically continuous. We first show that f must be monotone: let x ≤ x′ be
elements of D. If f (x) 6≤ f (x′ ) then O = E \ ↓f (x′ ) is an open neighborhood of f (x)
not containing f (x′ ). The inverse image of O contains x but not x′ . This contradicts
our assumption as open sets are always upper sets. Now let A ⊆ D be directed. If
                                                                  W
the supremum of the directed set f (A) is not above f ( ↑ A) then arguing as before
                                               W↑                                         W↑
we have the Scott-open set O = E \ ↓             a∈A f (a) which is a neighborhood of f (      A)
                 W↑                                                          W↑
but not of        a∈A f (a). The inverse image of O is open and contains          A, hence some
element a ∈ A. Since O is an upper set and since f (a) is in O we also must have
W↑
  a∈A f (a) ∈ O. This contradiction finishes our proof.


      The image under a continuous mapping is not necessarily a dcpo again. For this
to hold true we need to impose further restrictions.
24                                                          Chapter 1: Basic Concepts




Definition. Let D and E be dcpo’s. A continuous function r: D → D is called a
retraction if r ◦ r = r. It is called a projection if also r ≤ idD holds.
     Continuous functions r: D → E and e: E → D are said to form a retraction-embedding
pair, if r◦e equals the identity function on E. The pair (r, e) is a projection-embedding
pair if e ◦ r is a projection on D and r ◦ e = idE .
     If there is a retraction-embedding pair between D and E, the retraction mapping
D onto E, we say that E is a retract of D.

     Typical retracts, which we will use throughout this work, are those of the form
↓d for d an arbitrary element of a dcpo D. In this case the retraction r: D → D is
given by                                  
                                              x, if x ≤ d;
                                 r(x) =
                                              d, otherwise.
By dualizing this definition we have an idempotent function onto the principal fil-
ter ↑c. In order to get a continuous mapping we have to require that c is a compact
element.

Proposition 1.16 Let D be a dcpo and let r be a retraction on D. Then im(r) is
a dcpo and the supremum of a directed subset of im(r) formed in im(r) coincides
with the supremum formed in D. If D is continuous then so is im(r).

Proof. Let A be a directed subset of im(r). Applying the retraction to the supre-
                             W            W↑               W↑         W↑           W↑
mum of A in D we get: r( ↑ A) =               a∈A r(a) =    a∈A a =        A. So        A belongs
to im(r). This shows the first part of the proposition.
     For x an element of im(r) and x′ any element of D way-below x we show that
                                                                             W↑
r(x′ ) is way-below x in im(r). Let A ⊆ im(r) be directed with                    A ≥ x. Since
we can calculate directed suprema either in D or in im(r), A must contain some
element a which is above x′ . For this element we also have a = r(a) ≥ r(x′ ). From
this it is clear that a retraction preserves continuity of the domain.
1.3     Scott-topology and continuous functions                                    25




                                                             ⊤1   s
                                                                  @
                                                                      @
                                                                       @s ⊤
                                                        ``                2
                                                    `
                                       a3       s
                                                @
                                                           `
                                                        ``
                                                  @
                              a2       s           @c b
                                                              2
                                       @
                                         @
                        a1    s              @c b
                                                    1
                              @
                                @
                                    @s

                                    ⊥



Figure 1.2: A non-continuous dcpo as the image of a monotone idempotent function
on D.




      We would like to note that the image of a monotone idempotent function on a
dcpo is again a dcpo, but that continuity is not necessarily preserved. Figure 1.2
shows an example. The function on D is given by
                                        
                                            ⊥, if x = b1 , b2 , . . .;
                             f (x) =
                                            x, otherwise.

The image is isomorphic to the non-continuous example shown in Figure 1.1.
      Retracts of algebraic dcpo’s may not be algebraic again, but any continuous dcpo
may be gotten as a retract from an algebraic domain. This is the content of the
following

Proposition 1.17        (i) Let D be a poset. Then the set I(D) of all ideals in D
        ordered by inclusion, is an algebraic dcpo.
26                                                                             Chapter 1: Basic Concepts




 (ii) If D is a continuous dcpo then there is a projection from I(D) onto D.

Proof. It is easy to check that the directed union of directed sets is again a directed
set and that principal ideals are compact elements in I(D). This proves part (i).
                                                                         W↑
     The retraction r: I(D) → D is given by A 7→                               A, the embedding by x 7→ ↓x.
Again, the details are easy to check.

Proposition 1.18 Let D be a dcpo.
                    r
  (i) The set [D −→ D] of retractions on D is a dcpo.
                    p
 (ii) The set [D −→ D] of projections on D is a dcpo.

(iii) If p is a projection on D then for all x ∈ D : p(x) = max {y ∈ im(p) | y ≤ x}.

(iv) For projections p, p′ : D → D we have the equivalence: p ≤ p′ if and only if
       im(p) ⊆ im(p′ ).

Proof. (i) Let (ri )i∈I be a directed family of retractions. For any x ∈ D we can
calculate
                          _                _                     _         _
                                ↑                ↑                 ↑            ↑
                          (         ri ) ◦ (         ri )(x) =          ri ( ri (x))
                              i∈I              i∈I               i∈I    i∈I
                                                                 _ _
                                                                    ↑  ↑
                                                            =            ri (rj (x))
                                                                 i∈I j∈I
                                                                 _
                                                                   ↑
                                                            =           ri (ri (x))
                                                                 i∈I
                                                                 _
                                                                    ↑
                                                            =           ri (x).
                                                                 i∈I

Hence the supremum of retractions is again an idempotent function. We have proved
in Proposition 1.11 that it is also continuous.
     (ii) Projections are retractions below the identity function. The supremum of
such functions is again below idD .
                                                                               W↑
     (iii) Clearly, x ≥ p(x) ∈ im(p) holds, so p(x) ≤                               {y ∈ im(p) | y ≤ x}. On the
other hand, for each y ∈ im(p) below x we have y = p(y) ≤ p(x).
1.3     Scott-topology and continuous functions                                     27




      (iv) If p ≤ p′ and x is in im(p) then we have p′ (x) ≤ x = p(x) ≤ p′ (x) and x is
in im(p′ ). The other implication follows directly from (iii).


      As we have now exhibited the morphisms for dcpo’s we may define the following
categories:

        DCPO: Directed-complete partial orders with continuous functions.

        CONT: Continuous dcpo’s with continuous functions.

        ALG: Algebraic dcpo’s with continuous functions.

We use the subscript ⊥ to denote the respective full subcategory consisting of objects
with a least element.

Definition. Let C be any category. We say that C is cartesian closed if the follow-
ing three conditions are satisfied:

  (i) There is a terminal object T in C such that for any object A ∈ C there is
        exactly one morphism α: A → T .

 (ii) For any two objects A, B ∈ C there exists an object A×B in C and morphisms
        pr1 : A × B → A, pr2 : A × B → B such that for any object C and morphisms
        f : C → A, g: C → B there is a unique morphism f × g: C → A × B such that
        pr1 ◦ (f × g) = f and pr2 ◦ (f × g) = g. The object A × B is called the product
        of A and B.

(iii) For any two objects A, B ∈ C there exists an object AB in C and a morphism
        ev: AB × B → A such that for each f : C × B → A there exists a unique mor-
        phism Λf : C → AB such that ev ◦ (Λf × idB ) = f . The object AB is called the
        exponential object for A and B.
28                                                                    Chapter 1: Basic Concepts




Lemma 1.19 Let D, E, and F be dcpo’s and let f : D × E → F be a function of
two variables. Then f is continuous if and only if f is continuous in each variable
separately.

Proof. Let f be separately continuous and let A be a directed subset of D × E.
We calculate
                          _                     _                 _
                             ↑                      ↑                 ↑
                        f(       A) = f (                                 (d, e))
                                            d∈pr1 (A) e∈pr2 (A)
                                            _                     _
                                                ↑                     ↑
                                      =                 f(                (d, e))
                                          d∈pr1 (A)         e∈pr2 (A)
                                            _               _
                                                ↑                 ↑
                                      =                               f (d, e)
                                          d∈pr1 (A) e∈pr2 (A)
                                            _
                                              ↑
                                      =             f (d, e).
                                          (d,e)∈A

The converse is immediate.

Proposition 1.20 The categories DCPO and DCPO⊥ are cartesian closed.

Proof. The one-point domain serves as the terminal object in both categories. For
the categorical product we take the set-theoretic product together with the pointwise
order. It is trivial to check that the projections are continuous and satisfy the
required equations.
     We have already proved (Proposition 1.11) that the space [D −→ E] of all Scott-
continuous functions is again a dcpo. It is the natural choice for the exponential ob-
ject of dcpo’s D and E. We prove that the evaluation function ev: [D −→ E] × D → E
is continuous: by Lemma 1.19 we can check continuity for both variables separately,
so let first F be a directed collection of functions from D to E.
                                  _                      _
                                    ↑                        ↑
                              ev(       F, d) = (                F )(d)
                                                        _
                                                           ↑
                                              =                f (d)
                                                        f ∈F
                                                        _
                                                           ↑
                                              =                ev(f, d)
                                                        f ∈F
1.3     Scott-topology and continuous functions                                   29




Assume now that A is a directed set in D:
                                        _            _
                                        ↑                  ↑
                                ev(f,       A) = f (           A)
                                                   _
                                                       ↑
                                               =           f (a)
                                                   a∈A
                                                   _
                                                     ↑
                                               =           ev(f, a).
                                                   a∈A


Given a morphism f : F × E → D we define the function Λf : F → DE elementwise:
x 7→ f (x, ·). It is again trivial to check that this a continuous mapping and that
ev ◦ (Λf × idE ) = f .


      We note that any full subcategory C of DCPO or of DCPO⊥ , which contains
the one-point domain, the cartesian product, and the space [A −→ B] of Scott-
continuous functions for any two objects A, B ∈ C, is itself cartesian closed since
we have defined cartesian closedness in terms of equations.
      On the other hand, there is not much choice for these constructs in a cartesian
closed full subcategory of DCPO. This can be seen from the following lemma which
essentially appears in [24] already.

Lemma 1.21 Let C be a cartesian closed full subcategory of DCPO. Then the
following holds for any two objects A, B ∈ C.

  (i) The terminal object T of C is isomorphic to the one-point domain.

 (ii) The categorical product of A and B is isomorphic to the cartesian product
        A × B.

(iii) The exponential object AB is isomorphic to [B −→ A].

Proof. (i) Suppose T has two distinct elements x and x′ . Then there are two
continuous functions from T into itself: the constant functions with image x and
with image x′ , respectively.
30                                                             Chapter 1: Basic Concepts




     (ii) We denote the categorical product of A and B in C by A · B and show
that it is isomorphic to A × B. For each pair of elements a ∈ A, b ∈ B there are
functions ā: T → A and b̄: T → B which map the one element of T onto a and b,
respectively. By the universal property of the categorical product there is a unique
function ā × b̄: T → A · B whose image is thus the unique element (a, b) of A · B
which is projected onto a and b, respectively. This proves that there is a bijection
between the elements of A × B and A · B.
     We still have to show that A · B carries the right order. Since the projections
pr1 and pr2 must be monotone, the order on A · B is contained (via the bijection) in
the order of A × B. For the converse we distinguish two cases: if no two elements
of any object of C are comparable, then A · B is also totally unordered. If we have
d < d′ in some object D and if (a, b) ≤ (a′ , b′ ) in A × B then there are continuous
mappings ā: D → A and b̄: D → B defined by, e.g.,
                                             
                                                 a, if x ≤ d;
                                  ā(x) =
                                                 a′ , otherwise.
The map ā × b̄ maps d onto (a, b) and d′ onto (a′ , b′ ) and by continuity of this map
(a, b) ≤ (a′ , b′ ) holds in A · B.
   (iii) Given objects A, B ∈ C we show that AB is isomorphic to [B −→ A]. Given
an object C ∈ C and a morphism f : B → A we have the arrow f ′ : T × B ∼
                                                                       =B→A
and by the universal property of AB there is exactly one element f¯ = im(Λf ′ ) of
AB corresponding to f . Thus there is a bijection between the elements of AB and
[B −→ A]. As for the product one can easily show that this bijection is an order
isomorphism.

     Neither the category ALG nor the category CONT are cartesian closed: con-
sider the set Z− of negative integers with their usual ordering. We show that no
function g ∈ [Z− −→ Z− ] is way-below a second function f ∈ [Z− −→ Z− ]. For
each n ∈ N define a function fn : Z− → Z− by setting
                                         
                                             f (x),    if x ≥ −n;
                              fn (x) =
                                             g(x) − 1, otherwise.
1.4     Bifinite domains                                                            31




Since we may assume that g ≤ f holds, this is a continuous mapping. The supremum
of all fn equals f but no fn is above g.

Proposition 1.22 Let D be a dcpo with a continuous function space [D −→ D]
and let E be a retract of D. Then [E −→ E] is a retract of [D −→ D] and hence a
continuous dcpo.

Proof. Let r: D → E be the retraction onto E and let i: E → D be the correspond-
ing embedding. For f an element of [D −→ D], g an element of [E −→ E] we
define a continuous mapping R: [D −→ D] → [E −→ E] by R(f ) = r ◦ f ◦ i and
a continuous mapping I: [E −→ E] → [D −→ D] by I(g) = i ◦ g ◦ r. We have
R ◦ I(g) = r ◦ i ◦ g ◦ r ◦ i = g, so (R, I) is a retraction-embedding pair.

Theorem 1.23 If C is a cartesian closed full subcategory of ALG then cC, the
category of retracts of objects in C (with Scott-continuous functions as arrows) is
cartesian closed.

Proof. We still have the terminal object in cC and it is clear that the product of
two retracts is a retract of the corresponding product. For the function space we
have proved this in the preceding lemma. All the necessary equations hold since we
are inside the cartesian closed category DCPO.

      If we are considering dcpo’s with a bottom element then there are good reasons to
look only at functions which preserve this element. We call such functions strict and
                                                                                s
denote the space of all strict functions from a dcpo D to a dcpo E by [D −→ E].
However, the category DCPOs⊥ of dcpo’s with strict functions as arrows is not
cartesian closed, although it is closed with respect to a different product, which is
not the categorical product. This construction, frequently called ‘smash’-product,
can be described as the cartesian product with all elements of the form (⊥, y) or
(x, ⊥) identified with the bottom element. It is in accordance with one possible
philosophy about the least element, namely, that a function of several variables
should be undefined whenever at least one of the arguments is undefined.
32                                                        Chapter 1: Basic Concepts




1.4       Bifinite domains
At several places we have already alluded to the idea of one element approximating
another. In the last section, in particular, we exhibited the distinction between
‘ideal elements’ and ‘finite (=compact) elements’ and stipulated that the former
are always representable as limits of finite elements. We now wish to extend this
idea to the level of domains themselves, that is, we will define domains which are
representable as limits (in fact: bilimits) of finite posets. The resulting structures
we call bifinite domains.
     It was Gordon Plotkin who first started the study of these structures in 1976
(see [19]), when he tried to define a ‘powerset’ for domains. He found that his
construction led him out of the categories of lattices and semilattices but worked
fine on his class SFP (= Sequences of Finite Posets). Our definition is slightly more
general, allowing arbitrary directed index sets but all theorems in this section are
essentially due to Plotkin. We have enriched the subject with a couple of examples
(Figures 1.6 to 1.11), which illustrate several aspects of bifiniteness and show that
the hypotheses in some central propositions cannot be weakened.
     We begin with the following general

Definition. A codirected system over a category C is a family (Di )i∈I , with I a
directed set, of objects from C together with a set of arrows (dij )i≤j,i,j∈I such that
the following holds for all i, j, k ∈ I:

  (i) dij : Dj → Di ,

 (ii) dii = idDi ,

(iii) i ≤ j ≤ k =⇒ dik = dij ◦ djk .

     We say that D∗ is a limit of the codirected system ((Di )i∈I , (dij )i≤j ) in C if there
is a collection (di )i∈I of mappings with di : D∗ → Di and di = dij ◦ dj for all i ≤ j
in I such that for any object E and mappings ei : E → Di , commuting with the
1.4     Bifinite domains                                                                33




connecting morphisms dij , there is a unique arrow f : E → D satisfying ei = di ◦ f
for all i ∈ I.

      From the general theory of limits in categories we know that D∗ is unique up to
isomorphism.
      We have already mentioned that we wish to form limits of finite posets but we
haven’t said what the connecting morphisms should be. We will not use arbitrary
monotone functions, since we want view the objects Di as approximations to the
limit object D∗ , Dj being a better approximation than Di whenever i ≤ j. It is
hard to compare posets Di and Dj when there is nothing else between them than
a monotone function. If we use the projection part of projection-embedding pairs
instead then we can indeed speak of Di approximating Dj : Di is embedded in Dj and
for each element x of Dj there is a largest element x′ of Di below x. This motivates
our study of codirected systems in categories Cp , where the objects are taken from
a particular subclass of directed-complete partial orders and the morphisms are
projections.
      A projection dij : Dj → Di uniquely determines the corresponding embedding
eji : Di → Dj . So any codirected system ((Di )i∈I , (dij )i≤j ) in Cp gives rise to a
directed system ((Di )i∈I , (eji )i≤j ) in the dual category Ce . It is obvious that the
limit of the former is isomorphic to the colimit of the latter. This limit-colimit
coincidence is the reason why we speak of the bilimit of the system ((Di )i∈I , (dij )i≤j )
and why we call the bilimits of finite posets bifinite domains. This terminology is
due to Paul Taylor (cf. [26]) and we adopt it in this work.

Theorem 1.24 Any codirected system (Di , dij ) in DCPOp has a bilimit D∗ .

Proof. We define the limit object
                                        Y
                     D∗ = {(ai )i∈I ∈         Di | ∀i ≤ j : dij (aj ) = ai }
                                        i∈I
34                                                            Chapter 1: Basic Concepts




and the limiting morphisms

                                  dj ((ai )i∈I ) = aj , ∀j ∈ I.

It is clear that D∗ is a dcpo since the connecting morphisms dij are continuous. It
remains to show that the limiting morphisms are projections. This is done most
easily by giving the corresponding embeddings ei (the embedding eji corresponds to
the projection dij ):

                ei (a) = (djk ◦ eki (a))j∈I , k any upper bound of {i, j}.

First of all, ei is well-defined: if k, k ′ are upper bounds for {i, j} then there is an
upper bound l of {k, k ′ } in I. We calculate:

                         djk ◦ eki (a) = djk ◦ dkl ◦ elk ◦ eki (a)
                                        = djl ◦ eli (a)
                                        = djk′ ◦ dk′ l ◦ elk′ ◦ ek′ i (a)
                                        = djk′ ◦ ek′ i (a).

Secondly, ei (a) is an element of D∗ :

                          dlj (djk ◦ eki (a)) = dlj ◦ djk ◦ eki (a)
                                               = dlk ◦ eki (a).

It remains to show that (ei , di ) is an embedding-projection pair. The proof consists
again of two simple calculations:

                        ei ◦ di ((aj )j∈I ) = ei (ai )
                                           = (djk ◦ eki (ai ))j∈I
                                           = (djk ◦ eki ◦ dik (ak ))j∈I
                                           ≤ (djk (ak ))j∈I
                                           = (aj )j∈I
1.4     Bifinite domains                                                             35




and

                            di ◦ ei (a) = di ((djk ◦ eik (a))j∈I )
                                        = dik ◦ eki (a)
                                        = a.

It is obvious that all functions ei are continuous since we have defined them in terms
of the connecting morphisms.


Definition. A dcpo D is a bifinite domain if it is isomorphic to the limit of a
codirected system of finite posets with least element in DCPOp⊥ . We denote the
category of bifinite domains with Scott-continuous functions by B.

      Note that we require a least element for bifinite domains, although the definition
works for arbitrary finite posets as well. The doctoral thesis of Carl Gunter ([9])
studies bifinite domains defined this way. However, we will exhibit a general method
of passing from pointed domains to domains without least element in Chapter 3, so
it seems to us the right way first to restrict our attention to pointed domains.
      The limiting projection di from a bifinite domain D onto the finite factor Di is,
composed with the corresponding embedding, a projection on D with finite image.
Such functions play a prominent rôle throughout this work, so we introduce a name
for them:

Definition. Let D be a dcpo. A continuous function f : D → D, which is smaller
than the identity on D and which has a finite image, is called a deflation.

      Note that a deflation is a projection if and only if it is idempotent.

Proposition 1.25 Let D be a dcpo and let f : D → D be a deflation on D. Then
the following statements are true:

  (i) ∀x ∈ D : f (x) ≪ x.
36                                                        Chapter 1: Basic Concepts




 (ii) f 2 ≪ idD in [D −→ D].

 (iii) f 3 ≪ f in [D −→ D].

If f is an idempotent deflation then all elements in the image of f are compact and
f is a compact element of [D −→ D].

                                                                W↑
Proof. Let A ⊆ D be a directed family such that x ≤                  A. Applying f we get:
            W↑          W↑
f (x) ≤ f (      A) =    a∈A f (a).   Since the image of f is finite the latter set has a
largest element f (a0 ). Hence we have f (x) ≤ f (a0 ) ≤ a0 .
     For the second part assume that (gi )i∈I is a directed family of functions from
                        W↑
D to D such that         i∈I gi   ≥ idD . Then for all elements in the (finite) image of
f there is some gi such that gi (x) ≥ f (x) holds. From directedness we get an
index i0 such that gi0 (x) ≥ f (x) holds for all x ∈ im(f ). Thus we have for all
x ∈ D : gi0 (x) ≥ gi0 (f (x)) ≥ f (f (x)) = f 2 (x).
     The proof for part (iii) is similar. Let (gi )i∈I be a directed family of functions
with a supremum above f . By part (i) there is i0 ∈ I such that gi0 (x) ≥ f 2 (x) holds
for all x ∈ im(f ). This implies gi0 (x) ≥ gi0 (f (x)) ≥ f 2 (f (x)) = f 3 (x) for all x ∈ D.
     The conclusions for idempotent deflations follow immediately.


Theorem 1.26 The following are equivalent for any dcpo D with least element.

  (i) D is a bifinite domain.

 (ii) The set of idempotent deflations on D is directed and has idD as its supremum
       in [D −→ D].

 (iii) There exists some directed set (di )i∈I of idempotent deflations on D, the supre-
       mum of which is idD .

Proof. (i) =⇒ (ii) Let D be the limit of finite posets Di . The mappings ei ◦ di
                                                                            W↑
are idempotent deflations on D. For any x ∈ D we show that x =                i∈I ei ◦ di (x).
1.4     Bifinite domains                                                                37




The element x ∈ D can be thought as a sequence (xi )i∈I . For j ≥ i0 we have
di0 ◦ ej ◦ dj ((xi )i∈I ) = xi0 and hence ej ◦ dj leaves all components xi0 of the sequence
(xi )i∈I with i0 ∈ ↓j fixed. I is directed and this proves our claim.
      Now, if f and f ′ are any two idempotent deflations on D then we know by
Proposition 1.25 that they are compact elements of the function space and therefore
some ei ◦ di must lie above both of them.
      (ii) =⇒ (iii) is trivial.
      (iii) =⇒ (i) We show that D is isomorphic to the limit of the finite posets im(di ).
The connecting morphism dij for i ≤ j is given by fi im(fj ) . If we denote by D∗
the limit of this system then we have the map s from D to D∗ which maps each
element x ∈ D onto the sequence (fi (x))i∈I . The inverse mapping is given by
              W↑
(xi )i∈I 7→    i∈I xi . The details are easy to check.


Corollary 1.27 A bifinite domain is algebraic.

Proof. This follows directly from Theorem 1.26 and Proposition 1.25.

Theorem 1.28 The category B of bifinite domains is cartesian closed and allows
the formation of arbitrary products.

Proof. We use the characterization given by Theorem 1.26. If D and E are bifinite
domains and if fD : D → D and fE : E → E are idempotent deflations then fD × fE
is a deflation on D × E. This proves that D × E is again bifinite. On the function
space [D −→ E] we get the idempotent deflation F defined by F (g) = fE ◦ g ◦ fD .
      For (Di )i∈I an arbitrary collection of bifinite domains we construct idempotent
deflations as follows: let J be a finite subset of I and fix an idempotent deflation fj
                           Q
for each j ∈ J. Then           i∈I gi , where
                                              
                                   fi , if i ∈ J;
                                       gi =
                                   c⊥ , otherwise,
                             Q
is an idempotent deflation on i∈I Di .
      In all three cases the set of idempotent deflations constructed this way is directed
and yields the identity function.
38                                                         Chapter 1: Basic Concepts




     How can we see that a given dcpo D is indeed a bifinite domain? By the preceding
corollary we know that D must be algebraic. Also, for any finite set A of compact
elements there must be an idempotent deflation f on D which fixes these elements.
Any minimal upper bound of A must also be contained in the image of f since f
is below idD . By induction we find that minimal upper bounds of minimal upper
bounds of ... of minimal upper bounds of A are kept fixed under f . We will now
explore this idea in more detail since it will yield an internal characterization of
bifinite domains.

Definition. Let D be a partially ordered set. We say that D has property m if for
each finite set A ⊆ D the set mub(A) is complete, that is, for all x ≥ A there is a
minimal upper bound y of A which lies below x.
     If D has property m and if for each finite set of elements the set of minimal
upper bounds is finite then D has property M.
     Given a poset D with property m we define for any subset A of D

                 U 0 (A) = A,
               U n+1 (A) = {x ∈ D | x is a minimal upper bound for
                                              some finite subset of U n (A) },
                              [
                U ∞ (A) =          U n (A).
                             n∈N

     Figure 1.3 shows a dcpo which does not have property m, Figure 1.4 shows a
dcpo with property m but not property M. The dcpo in Figure 1.5 has property M
but the set U ∞ ({a, b}) is infinite. These are the standard examples of posets which
are not bifinite and we will show below that an algebraic dcpo, which does not
contain copies of these, is indeed bifinite.

Lemma 1.29 A poset D with property m has property M if and only if the empty
set and each pair of elements have a finite set of minimal upper bounds.
1.4   Bifinite domains                                                         39




                                               c
                                               L
                                                 L
                                               c L
                                              A L
                                              A L
                                             c A L
                                               J
                                                J AL
                                                  J AL
                                                   J AL
                                                    J AL
                                                      JAL
                                                       JAL
                                                         JAL
                               c                           JAL c
                                HHH                       
                                                       
                                       HH          
                                             H c




         Figure 1.3: An algebraic dcpo which does not have property m.




                         ca
                         AA aaa  Q              A         !!
                                         c         c              c
                                          Q             !
                                            Q      A !         
                           A         a aa Q     !!A        
                                                Q!
                             A           a!a
                                             !a !Q    A      
                              A      ! !      aaQ A 
                                                     Q
                                   !!
                               A c                 aaQA c
                                   H
                                   H                   
                                                       
                                     HH            
                                           HH 
                                              c




Figure 1.4: An algebraic dcpo with infinitely many minimal upper bounds for a pair
of compact elements.
